   RoboCup Soccer

   Humanoid League

   Laws of the Game

5  2025

   April 14th, 2025

                                                 The humanoid league group photo of 2025

   Changes to last year's rule book are either marked in magenta text colour (for additions) or by
   crossed out text (for deletions).

   RoboCup Humanoid League Mailing List (for important announcements):
10 https://mailman.cc.gatech.edu/mailman/listinfo/robocup-humanoid

   RoboCup Humanoid Forum (for rule discussion and questions):
   https://hl.forum.robocup.org
   RoboCup Humanoid League Home Pages:
   https://www.humanoid.robocup.org/
15 https://www.robocup.org/leagues/3
   Inspired by the Laws of the Game of the International Football Association Board,
   with amendments for the RoboCup Humanoid League.

    1
   Overview
   Section I ­ Laws of the Game
20 Section II ­ RoboCup Humanoid League Competition Rules
   Section III ­ Rules for RoboCup Humanoid League Technical Challenges (physical competition only)
   Appendix ­ Additional material

    2
Contents

25 Section I: Laws of the Game                        4

   Law 1 ­ The Field of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

   Law 2 ­ The Ball . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   Law 3 ­ The Players . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   Law 4 ­ The Players ('Equipment') . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

30 Law 5 ­ The Referee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

   Law 6 ­ The Assistant Referees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

   Law 7 ­ The Duration of the Match . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

   Law 8 ­ The Start and Restart of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

   Law 9 ­ The Ball In and Out of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34

35 Law 10 ­ The Method of Scoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

   Law 11 ­ Offside (suspended) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

   Law 12 ­ Fouls and Misconduct . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

   Law 13 ­ Free Kicks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

   Law 14 ­ The Penalty Kick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

40 Law 15 ­ The Throw-In . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49

   Law 16 ­ The Goal Kick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

   Law 17 ­ The Corner Kick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

   Procedures to Determine The Winner of a Match or Home-And-Away . . . . . . . . . . . 55

   The Technical Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

45 The Fourth Official and the Reserve Assistant Referee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58

   The Additional Assistant Referee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

Section 2: RoboCup Humanoid League Competition Rules  61

   The Competitions and Trophies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62

Section 3: Rules for RoboCup Humanoid League Technical Challenges (physical

50 competition only)                                  77

   General Rules for Technical Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78

   Part A: Push Recovery (AdultSize only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80

   Part B: Collaborative Localization (KidSize only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82

   Part C: Goal-Dynamic-Kick from Moving Ball . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

55 Part D: Parkour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

   Part E: High-Kick Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88

   Part F: Obstacle Navigation Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

   Part G: Long Stride Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

   Part H: Software Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92

60 Part I: SPL/HL Collaborative Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93

Appendix: Additional Material                         96

   Center of mass measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97

   Manual for building a Parkour Technical Challenge for Kid and Adult size . . . . . . . . . 99

3
            Section I

65          Laws of the Game

    The Laws of the Game should be updated regularly to refer to the most recent FIFA document.

    Deviations from the FIFA rules are marked in the text:

    'replaces': A RoboCup-specific rule temporarily replaces a FIFA rule.

    'suspended': A specific FIFA rule is not yet applied.

    'new':  A RoboCup-specific rule is temporarily introduced.

    4
   NOTES ON THE LAWS OF THE GAME
70 Modifications

   Subject to the agreement of the member association concerned and provided the principles of these
   Laws are maintained, the Laws may be modified in their application for regional matches.
   Any or all of the following modifications are permissible:

       · size of the field of play
75 · size, weight and material of the ball

       · width between the goalposts and height of the crossbar from the ground
       · duration of the periods of play
       · substitutions
   Male and Female
80 References in respect of referees, assistant referees and officials have been changed from the original
   FIFA document to a gender neutral language. The reference to players, since they refer to robots
   in this context, have been kept in the male gender. However, we strongly encourage the FIFA to
   officially change their laws of the game to fully gender neutral language in the future in respect to
   all participants in the game.
85 (replaces: References to the male gender in the Laws of the Game in respect of referees, assistant
   referees, players and officials are for simplification and apply to both men and women.)
   Official languages
   RoboCup Humanoid League Technical Committee publishes the Laws of the Game in English.
   Key
90 A single line in the left-hand margin indicates new Law changes.

    5
    Law 1 ­ The Field of Play

    Field surface

95 Matches may be played on artificial surfaces with a height of approximately 30 mm.
    (replaces: Matches may be played on natural or artificial surfaces, according to the rules of the
    competition.)

    The colour of artificial surfaces must be green.

    (suspended: Where artificial surfaces are used in either competition matches between representative
100 teams of member associations affiliated to FIFA or international club competition matches, the

    surface must meet the requirements of the FIFA Quality Concept for Football Turf or the International
    Artificial Turf Standard, unless special dispensation is given by FIFA.)

    Field markings

105

    The field of play must be rectangular and marked with lines. These lines belong to the areas of
    which they are boundaries.

    The two longer boundary lines are called touch lines. The two shorter lines are called goal lines.

    The field of play is divided into two halves by a halfway line, which joins the midpoints of the two
110 touch lines.

    The centre mark is indicated at the midpoint of the halfway line. A circle with a radius of 0.75 m
    for KidSize and 1.5 m for AdultSize is marked around it. (replaces: A circle with a radius of 9.15 m
    (10 yds) is marked around it.)

    (suspended: Marks may be made off the field of play, 9.15 m (10 yds) from the corner arc and
115 at right angles to the goal lines and the touch lines, to ensure that defending players retreat this

    distance when a corner kick is being taken.)

    Dimensions

120 The length of the touch line must be greater than the length of the goal line.

    KidSize matches
     Length (touch line): approximately 9 m
     Width (goal line): approximately 6 m
    (replaces:
     Length (touch line): minimum 90 m

                               maximum 120 m
     Width (goal line): minimum 45 m

                               maximum 90 m)

125 All lines must be of the same width, which must be approximately 5 cm.
    (replaces: All lines must be of the same width, which must be not more than 12 cm (5 ins).)

     6
    AdultSize matches
     Length (touch line): approximately 14 m
     Width (goal line): approximately 9 m
    (replaces:
     Length (touch line): minimum 100 m

                               maximum 110 m

130

     Width (goal line): minimum 64 m
                               maximum 75 m)

    The goal area

    Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 0.2 m from the inside of each goalpost for
135 KidSize and 0.7 m for AdultSize. These lines extend into the field of play for a distance of 1 m and

    are joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area bounded by these lines and the goal
    line is the goal area.
    (replaces: Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 5.5 m (6 yds) from the inside of each
    goalpost. These lines extend into the field of play for a distance of 5.5 m (6 yds) and are joined
140 by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area bounded by these lines and the goal line is the
    goal area. )

    The penalty area

145 Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 1.2m from the inside of each goalpost for
    KidSize and 0.7 m for AdultSize. These lines extend into the field of play for a distance of 2 m for
    KidSize and 3 m for AdultSize. They are joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area
    bounded by these lines and the goal line is the penalty area.
    (replaces: Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 16.5 m (18 yds) from the inside of

150 each goalpost. These lines extend into the field of play for a distance of 16.5 m (18 yds) and are
    joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area bounded by these lines and the goal line
    is the penalty area.)

    Within each penalty area, a penalty mark is made at 2.1m for AdultSize and 1.5m for KidSize from
    the midpoint between the goalposts and equidistant to them. (replaces: Within each penalty area,
155 a penalty mark is made 11 m (12 yds) from the midpoint between the goalposts and equidistant to
    them.)

    (suspended: An arc of a circle with a radius of 9.15 m (10 yds) from the centre of each penalty
    mark is drawn outside the penalty area.)

    Flagposts

160

    (suspended: A flagpost, not less than 1.5 m (5 ft) high, with a non-pointed top and a flag must be
    placed at each corner.)

    (suspended: Flagposts may also be placed at each end of the halfway line, not less than 1 m (1 yd)
165 outside the touch line.)

     7
    The corner arc

    (suspended: A quarter circle with a radius of 1 m (1 yd) from each corner flagpost is drawn inside
170 the field of play.)

    Goals

    A goal must be placed on the centre of each goal line.
175 A goal consists of two upright posts equidistant from the corner flagposts and joined at the top by

    a horizontal crossbar. The goalposts and crossbar must be made of wood, metal or other approved
    material. They must be square, rectangular, round or elliptical in shape and must not be dangerous
    to players.
    The distance between the posts is 2.6 m and the distance from the lower edge of the crossbar to
180 the ground is 1.2 m for KidSize and 1.8m for AdultSize.
    (replaces: The distance between the posts is 7.32 m (8 yds) and the distance from the lower edge
    of the crossbar to the ground is 2.44 m (8 ft).)
    (suspended: figures of different goal post geometries)
    (suspended: The position of the goalposts in relation to the goal line must be according to the
185 graphics below.)
    If the shape of the goalposts is square (viewed from above), the sides must be parallel or perpendicular
    to the goal line. The sides of the crossbar must be parallel or perpendicular to the field plane.
    If the shape of the goalposts is elliptical (viewed from above), the longest axis must be perpendicular
    to the goal line. The longest axis of the crossbar must be parallel to the field plane.
190 If the shape of the goalposts is rectangular (viewed from above), the longest side must be perpen-
    dicular to the goal line. The longest side of the crossbar must be parallel to the field plane.
    Both goalposts and the crossbar have the same width and depth, which is not smaller than 8 cm
    and do not exceed 12 cm (5 ins). The goal lines must be approximately 5 cm of width. (replaces:
    The goal lines must be of the same width as the goalposts and the crossbar.) Nets (new:) which
195 must not be green or white may be attached to the goals and the ground behind the goal, provided
    that they are properly supported and do not interfere with the goalkeeper.
    The goalposts and crossbars must be white.

    Safety

200

    Goals must be anchored securely to the ground. Portable goals may only be used if they satisfy this
    requirement.

    The field of play

205

     8
        I             J
I

          E

C  D         F  H  K     G                                                                          B

                                                                             A
                                     Figure 1: Humanoid robot soccer field: Kid Size (scale: 1/80)

    (replaces figure of field)
    Light Condition

210

    The lighting resembles that of either artificial or natural light.
    Corner flagpost

215

    (suspended: figure of flagpost)
    Metric measurements
220 (suspended: figure with metric dimensions of field)
    Imperial measurements
    (suspended: figure with imperial dimensions of field)

     9
          I                                                                      J
    I
                                      H                 K                                G  B
            E

     CD F

                                                        A
               Figure 2: Humanoid robot soccer field: Adult Size (scale: 1/100)

               Table 1: Approximate dimensions of the rectangular field of soccer play.

                                         KidSize AdultSize

               A Field length            9 m 14 m

               B Field width             6m         9m

               C Goal depth                     0.6 m

               D Goal width                     2.6 m

               Goal height               1.2 m 1.8 m

               E Goal area length               1m

               F Goal area width         3m         4m

               G Penalty mark distance 1.5 m 2.1 m

               H Centre circle diameter  1.5 m 3 m

               I Border strip width (min.) 1 m      1m

               J Penalty area length     2m         3m

               K Penalty area width      5m         6m

10
225 Decisions of the International F.A. Board
    (suspended: Decision 1
    Where a technical area exists, it must meet the requirements approved by the International F.A.

230 Board, which are contained in the section of this publication entitled The Technical Area.)
    (suspended: Decision 2
    Where goal-line technology (GLT) is used, modifications to the goal frame may be allowed. They
    must be in accordance with the specifications stipulated in the FIFA Quality Programme for GLT
    and according to the above description, "Goals".)

     11
235 Law 2 ­ The Ball
    Qualities and measurements

     The ball is:

240 · spherical

         · is made of or resembles the weight, form, movement characteristics and appearance of leather
           or other suitable material

         · FIFA size 1 for KidSize and size 5 for AdultSize leagues. (replaces: of a circumference of not

         more than 70 cm (28 ins) and not less than 68 cm (27 ins) and: not more than 450 g (16 oz)

245      and not less than 410 g (14 oz) in weight at the start of the match)

         · (suspended: of a pressure equal to 0.6 ­ 1.1 atmosphere (600 ­ 1,100 g/cm2) at sea level (8.5
           lbs/sq in ­ 15.6 lbs/sq in))

     Replacement of a defective ball (physical competition only)

250

    If the ball bursts or becomes defective during the course of a match:

         · the match is stopped

         · the match is restarted by dropping the replacement ball at the place where the original ball

         became defective, unless play was stopped inside the goal area, in which case the referee drops

255      the replacement ball on the goal area line parallel to the goal line at the point nearest to where

         the original ball was located when play was stopped

     If the ball bursts or becomes defective during a penalty kick or during kicks from the penalty mark
     as it moves forward and before it touches any player or the crossbar or goalposts:

         · the penalty kick is retaken

260 If the ball bursts or becomes defective whilst not in play at a kick-off, goal kick, corner kick, free
    kick, penalty kick or throw-in:

         · the match is restarted accordingly

     The ball may not be changed during the match without the authority of the referee.

     12
    Decisions of the International F.A. Board

265

    (suspended: Decision 1
    In addition to the requirements of Law 2, acceptance of a ball for use in matches played in an official
    competition organised under the auspices of FIFA or the confederations is conditional upon the ball
270 bearing one of the following:

        · the official "FIFA APPROVED" logo
        · the official "FIFA INSPECTED" logo
        · the "INTERNATIONAL MATCHBALL STANDARD" logo
    Such a logo on a ball indicates that it has been tested officially and found to be in compliance with
275 specific technical requirements, different for each logo and additional to the minimum specifications
    stipulated in Law 2. The list of the additional requirements specific to each of the respective logos
    must be approved by the International F.A. Board. The institutes conducting the tests are subject
    to the approval of FIFA.
    Member association competitions may also require the use of balls bearing any one of these three
280 logos.
    (figures...))
    (suspended: Decision 2
    In matches played in an official competition organised under the auspices of FIFA, the confederations
    or the member associations, no form of commercial advertising on the ball is permitted, except for
285 the emblem of the competition, the competition organiser and the authorised trademark of the
    manufacturer. The competition regulations may restrict the size and number of such markings.)
    (suspended: Decision 3
    Where goal-line technology (GLT) is used, balls with integrated technology are allowed, but they must
    either be "FIFA APPROVED", "FIFA INSPECTED" or "INTERNATIONAL MATCHBALL STAN-
290 DARD" (see "Decision 1").)

     13
    Law 3 ­ The Players

    Number of Players

295 A match is played by two teams, each consisting of not more than four players in KidSize and not
    more than twothree players in AdultSize, one of whom must be designated as goalkeeper. A match
    may not start if either team consists of less than one player. In a virtual competition it is considered
    a forfeit if a team does not provide any software to play with for an upcoming game. If a team has
    not at least one player (who may be incapable to play) at the side of the field, it is considered a

300 forfeit in a physical competition.
    (replaces: A match is played by two teams, each consisting of not more than eleven players, one of
    whom is the goalkeeper. A match may not start if either team consists of fewer than seven players.)

    Number of substitutions (physical competition only)

305

    Official competitions
    Up to a maximum of two (replaces: three) substitutes may be used in any match played in an official
    competition organised under the auspices of FIFA, the confederations or the member associations.
    The rules of the competition must state how many substitutes may be nominated, from two (replaces:
310 three) up to a maximum of twelve.

    (suspended: Other matches
    In national "A" team matches, up to a maximum of six substitutes may be used.

    In all other matches, a greater number of substitutes may be used provided that:

        · the teams concerned reach agreement on a maximum number
315 · the referee is informed before the match

    If the referee is not informed, or if no agreement is reached before the match, no more than six
    substitutes are allowed.

    Substitution procedure (physical competition only)

320

    In all matches, the names of the substitutes must be given to the referee prior to the start of the
    match. Any substitute whose name is not given to the referee at this time may not take part in the
    match.

    To replace a player with a substitute, the following conditions must be observed:

325 · the referee must be informed before any proposed substitution is made
        · the substitute only enters the field of play after the player being replaced has left and after
          receiving a signal from the referee
        · the substitute only enters the field of play at the penalty mark of the player's own half (replaces:
          the halfway line) and during a stoppage in the match

330 · the substitution is completed when a substitute enters the field of play

     14
     · from that moment, the substitute becomes a player and the player he has replaced becomes a
       substituted player

     · (suspended: the substituted player takes no further part in the match)

     · all substitutes are subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the referee, whether called upon

335  to play or not

     Changing the goalkeeper

    Any of the other players may change places with the goalkeeper, provided that:
340 · the GameController (virtual competition) or the referee (physical competition) is informed

          before the change is made
        · the change is requested during a stoppage in the match
    Infringements and sanctions (physical competition only)

345

    If a substitute or substituted player or a team official enters the field of play without the referee's
    permission:

        · the referee stops play (although not immediately if the substitute or substituted player does
          not interfere with play)

350 · the referee cautions him for unsporting behaviour and orders him to leave the field of play
        · if the referee has stopped play, it is restarted with an direct free kick for the opposing team
          from the position of the ball at the time of the stoppage (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

    If a named substitute enters the field of play instead of a named player at the start of the match
    and the referee is not informed of this change:
355 · the referee allows the named substitute to continue the match

        · no disciplinary sanction is taken against the named substitute
        · the number of substitutions allowed by the offending team is not reduced
        · the referee reports the incident to the appropriate authorities

    If a player changes places with the goalkeeper without the referee's permission before the change is
360 made:

        · the referee allows play to continue
        · the referee cautions the players concerned when the ball is next out of play

    In the event of any other infringements of this Law:
        · the players concerned are cautioned

365 · the match is restarted with an indirect free kick, to be taken by a player of the opposing team
          from the position of the ball at the time of the stoppage (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     15
    Players and substitutes sent off (physical competition only)
370 A player who has been sent off before the kick-off may be replaced only by one of the named

    substitutes.
    A named substitute who has been sent off, either before the kick-off or after play has started, may
    not be replaced.

     16
    Law 4 ­ The Players ('Equipment')
375 Safety

    A player must not use equipment or wear anything that is dangerous to himself or another player
    (including any kind of jewellery).
380 The Design of the Robots (new)

    Robots participating in the Humanoid League competitions must have a human-like body plan, as
    shown in Fig. 3. They must consist of two legs, two arms, and one head, which are attached to a
385 trunk.
    (new:) Robots competing in the physical KidSize competition must be equipped with a handle, to
    be picked up safely and with no harm to the robot and the handler.

                  Figure 3: Example of a humanoid robot body plan (left) and standing upright pose (right)

    The robots must be able to stand upright on their feet and to walk on their legs. KidSize robots
    need to be able to recover from a fall (get back to a standing position). The only allowed modes of
390 locomotion are bipedal walking, running and jumping.
    All actions of the robots must be kinematically equivalent to humanoid motions.
    Robots competing in the physical competition must be equipped with an emergency stop button
    that makes the robot immediately desist with all motions, or ideally go limp and/or cut power to
    the actuators. In addition to the emergency stop button, robots may only have up to two additional
395 physical or virtual buttons: One to start the robot behaviour and one to stop the behaviour. The
    buttons must be clearly labeled. If the robot has more buttons that cannot be detached, they must
    be visibly masked during the games. In adult size, robot handlers are allowed to carry an additional
    remote emergency stop button. This button must be worn either around the neck or on the belt of
    the robot handler and must be clearly marked. Each emergency stop button can only be connected to
400 the robot of the robot handler that holds the button. The remote emergency button cannot perform
    any additional functions and does not replace the regular emergency button. Robot handlers must
    keep their hands clearly away from the button unless the button is being pressed. Robot handlers

     17
    must not use the remote emergency button to intentionally incapacitate their robots. Body parts
    of robots competing in the virtual competition that are considered feet and arms must be marked
405 in the virtual robot models.

    Robot Height (new)

    Based on Htop, the following size restrictions apply:

410 · 40 cm  Htop  100 cm to play in the KidSize class,

        · 100 cm  Htop  200 cm to play in the AdultSize class.

    Htop is defined as the height of the robot when standing upright (with fully extended knees, cf. Fig.
    3 right) and HCOM denotes the height of the robot's centre of mass, measured using the device
    and the procedure described in Appendix. Htop is measured with the head of the robot oriented in
415 such a way that it is tilted to either its maximum upwards tilt angle or the horizon line, whichever
    is lower.

    Weight Restrictions (new)

420  The    robot's  Body-Mass     Index    (BMI)  is  defined   as  follows:  BMI       =   , M      where  M  is  the  mass  of

                                                                                            Htop 2

     the robot in kg and Htop its height in meters. The following restriction applies:

         · 5  BMI  30

     Size Restrictions (new)

425

    All robots participating in the Humanoid League must comply with the following restrictions:

         ·  Each  foot  must  fit  into  a  rectangle  of  area  1   (2.2  ·  HCOM  )2.  A  foot  is  defined  as  the  minimum
                                                                 32
            encapsulating rectangle covering all mechanical parts below the ankle joint. The encapsulating

            rectangle should be in a plane parallel to the bottom contact surface of the foot.

430 · The ratio between the longest and the shortest side of the encapsulating rectangle should be
          between 1.2 and 3.5

        · The robot must fit into a cylinder of diameter 0.55 · Htop.

        · The robot does not possess a configuration where it is extended longer than 1.5·Htop .

        · The length of the legs Hleg, including the feet, satisfies 0.35·Htop  Hleg  0.7·Htop .

435 · The height of the head Hhead, including the neck, satisfies 0.1 · Htop  Hhead  0.3 · Htop.
          Hhead is defined as the vertical distance from the axis of the first arm joint at the shoulder to
          the top of the head.

         · The leg length is measured while the robot is standing up straight. The length is measured

            from the first rotating joint where its axis lies in the plane parallel to the standing ground to

440         the tip of the foot.

         · The minimum length of the arm, measured from the first joint, is Htop - Hleg - Hhead.

     18
        · The tip of the arm must not be able to reach lower than the knee joint while the robot is
          standing.

    Sensors (new)

445

     Teams participating in the Humanoid League competitions are encouraged to equip their robots
     with sensors that have an equivalent in human senses. These sensors must be placed at a position
     roughly equivalent to the location of the human's biological sensors. In particular,

450 · In the virtual competition, no active external sensors may be used during the game. In the
          physical competition, the only active external sensor allowed is sound ("human-like" with respect
          to volume and frequency) with one loudspeaker on the robot. The loudspeaker may be placed
          in the head, neck or trunk of the robot. Any other active sensor (emitting light, sound, or
          electromagnetic waves into the environment in order to measure reflections) is not allowed.

455 · External sensors, such as cameras and up to two microphones, may not be placed in the legs
          or arms or the torso of the robots. They must be placed in the robot's head and above any
          neck joint.

     · The number of cameras is limited to a stereo vision setup (i.e., max. 2 cameras with a large
       overlap) only. Monocular vision is also allowed.

460 · The field of view of the robots is limited at any time to 180 degrees. This means that the

     maximum angle between any two points in the union of the field of view of all cameras mounted

     on the robot must be less than 180 degrees. Also the pan-tilt motion of the head and the

     cameras mounted on the robot's head is restricted to be more human like not only with respect

     to the field of view but also to the range of motion of the neck joints. Therefore, the mechanism

465  to pan the camera is limited to 180 degree pan, which means ±90 degrees from the position

     looking straight ahead. The mechanism to tilt the camera is limited to ±90 degrees (measured

     from the horizontal line). Furthermore, if positioned at the centre mark the robot may not be

     able to see more than two goal posts in any tilt angle and in any standing or walking posture

     of the robot.

470 · Touch sensors, force sensors, and temperature sensors may be placed at any position on the
          robot.

     · Sensors inside the robot may measure all quantities representing the local state of the sys-

     tem, including (but not limited to) voltages, currents, forces, movements, accelerations, and

     rotational speeds. They can be at any position inside the robot. Measurements from earth

475  magnetic field sensors may not be used in the software and - in case of doubt - the code must

     be made available to members of the Technical Committee for inspection.

     Communication and Control (new)

480 Robots participating in the Humanoid League competitions must act autonomously while a compe-
    tition is running. No external power supply, teleoperation, remote control, or remote brain of any
    kind is allowed.

    Robots may communicate only via the (wireless) network provided by the organizers, which must
    support the referee box. The total bandwidth of each robot belonging to one team may not exceed
485 1 Mbit/s. In the virtual competition, teams will not be able to monitor the robot communication
    and receive debug messages during an ongoing simulation. In the physical competition, the robots

     19
    must not rely on the quality of the wireless network. They must be able to play if the network is
    of low quality. During a physical competition, only robots are allowed to communicate by WLAN.
    Any other computers of team members are only allowed to communicate by tethered LAN. No other
490 wireless communication is allowed onsite. All other wireless hardware must be deactivated. A team
    may be disqualified if one of the team members violates this rule.

    Robots in play may communicate with each other at any time during a game. Any kind of trans-
    mission from an external computer to the playing robots is prohibited. During a physical event, this
    implies that any monitoring is only done by receiving UDP communication from the robots using an
495 external computer connected by tethered LAN to the official wireless router.
    Substitute robots in a physical competition need to be turned away from the field in order to ensure
    they are not accidentally or purposefully sending game-relevant information to the robots in play.

    Sending any direct or indirect transmission from an external computer to the robots is not possible
    during a virtual game. During a physical game, it has to take place during a timeout or any form
500 of temporal absence and outside the field of play. Any time the robot handler or another team
    member is touching the robot, a cable is connected or another form of communication with the
    robot (including button clicks) take place, the robot is considered in service. The regular penalty
    time will start counting only after any type of communication with the robot has finished and will
    be reset whenever the robot handler attempts to service the robot again.

505 Teams may not use any type of communication with robots in play, in service or with robots serving
    their 3010 seconds penalty time that contains information which reduces the need for autonomy in
    detecting the current game state of the robots, including the position of the ball, the location where
    the robot re-enters the field, the orientation of the robots own or opponents goal, and the position
    of team members or opponents. In a physical game, verbal communication is excluded from this

510 rule. In case of doubt that a team violates this rule, the code must be made available to members
    of the Technical Committee for inspection.

    During the game an official game controller/referee box will be used. It uses UDP to broadcast
    information to the robots like elapsed time, current score, game state (ready, set, playing, finished)
    and the robot-specific penalized state. The source code is open. Teams have to be able to use the
515 referee box in order to respect the rules.

    In KidSize, noNo humans are allowed on the field while the ball is in play. During a phyiscal game,
    robot handlers stay in a designated area and must receive permission from the referee prior to
    entering the field. Each team may designate only one person as robot handler. The robot handler of
    a team may not touch a robot of another team in order to avoid any (unintentional or intentional)
520 damage to that robot.

    The source code of the game controller/referee box is available from
    https://github.com/RoboCup-Humanoid-TC/GameController, see also
    https://www.robocuphumanoid.org.

     20
    (suspended: Basic equipment

525

    The basic compulsory equipment of a player comprises the following separate items:
        · a jersey or shirt with sleeves ­ if undergarments are worn, the colour of the sleeve must be the
          same main colour as the sleeve of the jersey or shirt

530 · shorts ­ if undershorts or tights are worn, they must be of the same main colour as the shorts
        · stockings ­ if tape or similar material is applied externally it must be the same colour as that
          part of the stocking it is applied to shinguards footwear)

    (suspended: Shinguards

535

        · are covered entirely by the stockings
        · are made of rubber, plastic or a similar suitable material
        · provide a reasonable degree of protection)

    Colours

540

         · (new) Robots must be mostly black or of dark grey colour (i.e. RAL 7011 Iron Grey or darker)

         and non reflective. Robots may also be coloured in aluminimum-like silver, grey or white but

         then their feet must be coloured black. Any colour used for the field (green, white) or colours

545      similar to the opponent team's team markers must be avoided. Arms, legs and bodies of the

         robot must be of solid shape appearance.

         · (new) The robots must be marked with team markers. These markers are coloured red for one

         team and blue for the other team. Robots must have one single solid rectangular marker on the

         front and one on the back of the body. The area of each marker must be at least 0.03 · Htop2.

550      The team may choose to use a colored t-shirt/jersey instead of rectangular markers, as long as

         the area in which the team color is visible is equivalent to the rectangular markers. The total

         visible area of all team markers (up to 20) on the robot's arms, legs and chest combined must

         be at least 0.06 · Htop2. The visible area of the one to five largest team markers on each side
         (left, right, front and back) must be at least 0.015 · Htop2. The team that during the first half

555      plays the left side of the field (as viewed from the game controller table) plays in red, the team

         that plays the right side plays in blue. In the virtual competition, the color teams play in is

         randomly assigned and announced in the game plan.

         · (new) The robots of each team must be uniquely identifiable. They must be marked with

         numbers or names. The goal keeper robot must be marked uniquely that it can be easily

560      distinguished from the other robots of a team by the referees.

         · The two teams must wear colours that distinguish them from each other and also the referee
           and the assistant referees.

         · (suspended: Each goalkeeper must wear colours that distinguish him from the other players,
           the referee and the assistant referees)

     21
565 Infringements and sanctions

     In a virtual competition, the equipment of the players is checked by the Technical Committee prior
     to the tournament.

570 In the event of any infringement of this Law for a virtual tournament:

        · The Technical Committee notifies the team in advance of the tournament about the violations
          and allows them to correct the equipment of the players.

        · In case no valid robot model has been provided prior to the tournament, the team is excluded
          from participation.

575 In the event of any infringement of this Law occurring during a physical tournament:

         · play need not be stopped

         · the player at fault is instructed by the referee to leave the field of play to correct his equipment

         · the player leaves the field of play when the ball next ceases to be in play, unless he has already
           corrected his equipment

580 · any player required to leave the field of play to correct his equipment must not re-enter without
          the referee's permission

         · the referee checks that the player's equipment is correct before allowing him to re-enter the
           field of play

         · the player is only allowed to re-enter the field of play before the respective penalty time is over

585      (replaces: when the ball is out of play)

     A player who has been required to leave the field of play during a physical game because of an
     infringement of this Law and who re-enters the field of play without the referee's permission must
     be cautioned.

     22
    Restart of play (physical competition only)

590

     If play is stopped by the referee to administer a caution:

         · the match is restarted by an indirect free kick taken by a player of the opposing team from the

         place where the ball was located when the referee stopped the match (see Law 13 ­ Position

595      of free kick)

     Decisions of the International F.A. Board

    Decision 1
600 Players must not reveal undergarments showing slogans or advertising. The basic compulsory equip-

    ment must not have any political, religious or personal statements. A player removing his jersey or
    shirt to reveal slogans or advertising will be sanctioned by the competition organiser. The team of a
    player whose basic compulsory equipment has political, religious or personal slogans or statements
    will be sanctioned by the competition organiser (new) or by RoboCup Federation Humanoid League
. 605

     23
     Law 5 ­ The Referee
     The authority of the referee

610 Each match is controlled by a referee who has full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in
    connection with the match to which they have been appointed. Decisions will be made to the best
    of the referees ability according to the Laws of the Game and the spirit of the game and will be
    based on the opinion or programming of the referee who has the discretion to take appropriate action
    within the framework of the Laws of the Game.

615 The games are overseen by the Technical Committee of the league, who ensures that the players
    and (simulated) environment is according to the laws of the game, and who may sanction unsportive
    behavior by teams.

    Virtual Competition: Powers and duties

620

    The autonomous Referee:

         · enforces the Laws of the Game

         · controls the match

         · acts as timekeeper and keeps a record of the match

625 · stops, suspends or abandons the match, at their discretion, for any infringements of the Laws

        · punishes the more serious offence when a player commits more than one offence at the same
          time

         · takes disciplinary action against players guilty of cautionable and sending-off offences. They

         are not obliged to take this action immediately but must do so when the ball next goes out of

630      play

         · indicates the restart of the match after it has been stopped

         · provides the appropriate authorities with a match report, which includes information on any
           disciplinary action taken against players and/or team officials and any other incidents that
           occurred before, during or after the match

635 · indicates when the whole of the ball leaves the field of play
        · indicates which team is entitled to a corner kick, goal kick or throw-in

         · indicates whether, at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off the goal line before the ball is
           kicked and if the ball crosses the line

         · communicates its decisions directly to the GameController.

640 The Technical Committee:
        · ensures that any ball used meets the requirements of Law 2
        · ensures that the players' equipment meets the requirements of Law 4
        · stops, suspends or abandons the match because of outside interference of any kind

     24
         · takes action against team officials who fail to conduct themselves in a responsible manner and

645      may, at their discretion, expel them from the field of play and its immediate surrounds

     Physical Competition: Powers and duties

     The Referee:

650 · enforces the Laws of the Game

        · controls the match in cooperation with the assistant referees and, where applicable, with the
          fourth official

         · ensures that any ball used meets the requirements of Law 2

         · ensures that the players' equipment meets the requirements of Law 4

655 · acts as timekeeper and keeps a record of the match
        · stops, suspends or abandons the match, at their discretion, for any infringements of the Laws

         · stops, suspends or abandons the match because of outside interference of any kind

         · stops the match if, in their opinion, a player is seriously injured and ensures that he is removed

         from the field of play. An injured player may only return to the field of play after the respective

660      penalty time is over (replaces: after the match has restarted)

         · allows play to continue until the ball is out of play if a player is, in their opinion, only slightly
           injured

         · ensures that any player bleeding from a wound leaves the field of play. The player may only

         return on receiving a signal from the referee, who must be satisfied that the bleeding has

665      stopped

         · allows play to continue when the team against which an offence has been committed will benefit
           from such an advantage and penalises the original offence if the anticipated advantage does
           not ensue at that time

         · punishes the more serious offence when a player commits more than one offence at the same

670      time

         · takes disciplinary action against players guilty of cautionable and sending-off offences. They
           are not obliged to take this action immediately but must do so when the ball next goes out of
           play

         · takes action against team officials who fail to conduct themselves in a responsible manner and

675      may, at their discretion, expel them from the field of play and its immediate surrounds

         · acts on the advice of the assistant referees regarding incidents that they has not seen

         · ensures that no unauthorised persons enter the field of play

         · indicates the restart of the match after it has been stopped

         · provides the appropriate authorities with a match report, which includes information on any

680      disciplinary action taken against players and/or team officials and any other incidents that

         occurred before, during or after the match

     25
    Decisions of the referee
685 The decisions of the referee regarding facts connected with play, including whether or not a goal is

    scored and the result of the match, are final.
    In the physical competition, the referee may only change a decision on realising that it is incorrect
    or, at their discretion, on the advice of an assistant referee or the fourth official, provided that they
    have not restarted play or terminated the match.

     26
690 Decisions of the International F.A. Board

    Decision 1
    A virtual referee (or where applicable, an assistant referee, fourth official or the Technical Committee)
695 is not held liable for:
    any kind of injury suffered by a player, official or spectator
    any damage to property of any kind
    any other loss suffered by any individual, club, company, association or other body, which is due or
    which may be due to any decision that they may take under the terms of the Laws of the Game or
700 in respect of the normal procedures required to hold, play and control a match.

     Such decisions may include:

         · a decision that the condition of the field of play or its surrounds or that the weather conditions
           are such as to allow or not to allow a match to take place

         · a decision to abandon a match for whatever reason

705 · a decision as to the suitability of the field equipment and ball used during a match

         · a decision to stop or not to stop a match due to spectator interference or any problem in
           spectator areas (physical competition only)

         · a decision to stop or not to stop play to allow an injured player to be removed from the field
           of play for treatment (physical competition only)

710 · a decision to require an injured player to be removed from the field of play for treatment
          (physical competition only)

         · a decision to allow or not to allow a player to wear certain apparel or equipment

         · a decision (where they have the authority) to allow or not to allow any persons (including

         team or stadium officials, security officers, photographers or other media representatives) to be

715      present in the vicinity of the field of play (physical competition only)

         · any other decision that they may take in accordance with the Laws of the Game or in conformity
           with their duties under the terms of FIFA, confederation, member association or league rules
           or regulations under which the match is played

    Decision 2 (physical competition only)
720 In tournaments or competitions where a fourth official is appointed, their role and duties must be

    in accordance with the guidelines approved by the International F.A. Board, which are contained in
    this publication.

    Decision 3 (physical competition only)
    Where goal-line technology (GLT) is used (subject to the respective competition rules), the referee
725 has the duty to test the technology's functionality before the match. The tests to be performed
    are set out in the FIFA Quality Programme for GLT Testing Manual. If the technology does not
    function in accordance with the Testing Manual, the referee must not use the GLT system and must
    report this incident to the respective authority.

     27
    Law 6 ­ The Assistant Referees (physical competition only)
730 Duties

    Two assistant referees may be appointed whose duties, subject to the decision of the referee, are to
    indicate:
735 · when the whole of the ball leaves the field of play

        · which team is entitled to a corner kick, goal kick or throw-in
        · when a player may be penalised for being in an offside position
        · when a substitution is requested
        · when misconduct or any other incident occurs out of the view of the referee
740 · when offences have been committed whenever the assistant referees have a better view than

          the referee (this includes, in certain circumstances, offences committed in the penalty area)
        · whether, at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off the goal line before the ball is kicked and

          if the ball crosses the line
        · (new) operate the game controller
745 Assistance

    The assistant referees also assist the referee in controlling the match in accordance with the Laws
    of the Game. In particular, they may enter the field of play to help control the distances as defined
750 by the laws of the game (replaces: 9.15 m (10 yds) distance).
    In the event of undue interference or improper conduct, the referee will relieve an assistant referee
    of their duties and make a report to the appropriate authorities.

     28
    Law 7 ­ The Duration of the Match

    Periods of play

755

    The match lasts two equal periods of 10 minutes. Any agreement to alter the duration of the
    periods of play must be approved by the Technical Committee in the virtual competition or mutually
    agreed upon between the referee and the two teams in the physical competition, must be made
760 before the start of play and must comply with competition rules. (replaces: The match lasts two
    equal periods of 45 minutes, unless otherwise mutually agreed between the referee and the two
    teams. Any agreement to alter the duration of the periods of play (e.g. to reduce each half to 40
    minutes because of insufficient light) must be made before the start of play and must comply with
    competition rules.)
765 In the virtual competition, teams are given a 2 minute time period between the robot models being
    spawned and the start of the match to allow for the software of the robots to start properly. The
    start of the match is defined as the game state changing to READY for the first half time. At the
    beginning of the second half time, each half time in the extended period and the beginning of the
    penalty shootout, the autonomous referee will wait at least 15 seconds between spawning the robot
770 models and transitioning to an active game state. Once the end of the match was declared by the
    referee and communicated by the GameController, teams receive a 2 minute time period to finish
    writing logs and properly shut down their program before the process will be terminated.

    Half-time interval

775

    In the virtual competition, there is no half-time interval between the two periods of play. In the
    physical competition, players are entitled to an interval at half-time.
    The half-time interval must not exceed 5 minutes. (replaces: The half-time interval must not exceed
    15 minutes.)
780 Competition rules must state the duration of the half-time interval.
    The duration of the half-time interval may be altered only with the consent of the referee.

    Allowance for time lost (physical competition only)

785 Allowance is made in either period for all time lost through:

        · substitutions

        · assessment of injury to players

        · removal of injured players from the field of play for treatment

        · wasting time

790 · any other cause

    The allowance for time lost is at the discretion of the referee.

    Penalty kick (physical competition only)

795 If a penalty kick has to be taken or retaken, the duration of either half is extended until the penalty
    kick is completed.

     29
    Abandoned match
800 An abandoned match is replayed unless the competition rules provide otherwise.

    Set and Ready states
    During the Set and Ready states, the game clock should not be stopped in both knock-out and
805 round-robin games.

     30
    Law 8 ­ The Start and Restart of Play

    A kick-off starts both halves of a match, both halves of extra time and restarts play after a goal has
    been scored. Free kicks (direct or indirect), penalty kicks, throw-ins goal kicks and corner kicks are
    other restarts (see law 13-17).

810 If an infringement occurs when the ball is not in play this does not change how play is restarted.

    Definition of kick-off

    A kick-off is a way of starting or restarting play:
815 · at the start of the match

        · after a goal has been scored
        · at the start of the second half of the match
        · at the start of each period of extra time, where applicable
    A goal may (new:) not be scored directly from the kick-off by the team taking the kick-off. Either
820 the ball must move entirely outside the centre circle or must be touched by another player before
    being kicked into the goal. If the ball is kicked directly into the goal a goal-kick is awarded to the
    opposing team.

    Procedure

825

    Before a kick-off at the start of the match or extra time for a physical competition
        · a coin is tossed and the team that wins the toss decides which goal it will attack in the first
          half of the match.
        · the other team takes the kick-off to start the match.

830 · the team that wins the toss takes the kick-off to start the second half of the match.
        · in the second half of the match, the teams change ends and attack the opposite goals.

    Before a kick-off at the start of the match or extra time for a virtual competition
        · the autonomous referee decides randomly which team attacks which goal.
        · the autonomous referee decides randomly which team has kick-off in the first half of the match.

835 · the team that was not given the kick-off in the first half of the match takes the kick-off to
          start the second half of the match.

        · in the second half of the match, the teams change ends and attack the opposite goals.

    Kick-off
        · after a team scores a goal, the kick-off is taken by the other team.

840 · all players must be in their own half of the field of play

     31
        · the opponents of the team taking the kick-off are outside the center circle until it is in play
          (replaces: the opponents of the team taking the kick-off are at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the
          ball until it is in play)

        · the ball must be stationary on the centre mark

845 · the referee gives a signal

        · the ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves1 (new: as determined by the referee or
          10 seconds after the referee gave the signal)

        · (suspended) the kicker must not touch the ball again until it has touched another player

    Infringements and sanctions

850

     (suspended: If the player taking the kick-off touches the ball again before it has touched another
     player:

     · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team to be taken from the position of the ball

855  when the infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     In the event of any other infringement of the kick-off procedure:

     · the kick-off is retaken

     Definition of dropped ball

860

    A dropped ball is a method of restarting play when, while the ball is still in play, the referee is
    required to stop play temporarily for any reason not mentioned elsewhere in the Laws of the Game.
    In the virtual competition, the only reason for a dropped ball to be called is that the ball has moved
    less than 5 centimeters in the last 2 minutes of play.

865 Procedure

    The game is continued at the centre mark. A goal can be scored directly from a dropped ball. The
    procedure for dropped ball is the same as for kick-off, except that the players of both teams must
870 be outside the centre circle. The ball is in play immediately after the referee gives the signal. If a
    player moves too close to the ball before the referee gives the signal, a kick-off is awarded to the
    opponent team.
    (replaces: The referee drops the ball at the place where it was located when play was stopped, unless
    play was stopped inside the goal area, in which case the referee drops the ball on the goal area line
875 parallel to the goal line at the point nearest to where the ball was located when play was stopped.

    Play restarts when the ball touches the ground.)

    Infringements and sanctions

880 The ball is dropped again:
        · if it is touched by a player before it makes contact with the ground

           1In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered clearly moving.

     32
        · if the ball leaves the field of play after it makes contact with the ground, without a player
          touching it

    (suspended: If the ball enters the goal:
885 · if a dropped ball is kicked directly into the opponents' goal, a goal kick is awarded

        · if a dropped ball is kicked directly into the team's own goal, a corner kick is awarded to the
          opposing team

     33
    Law 9 ­ The Ball In and Out of Play
    Ball out of play

890

    The ball is out of play when:
        · it has wholly crossed the goal line or touch line whether on the ground or in the air
        · play has been stopped by the referee

895 Ball in play

     The ball is in play at all other times, including when:

         · it rebounds off a match official, goalpost, crossbar or corner flagpost and remains in the field

900      of play

     34
    Law 10 ­ The Method of Scoring
    Goal scored

905 A goal is scored when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, between the goalposts and
    under the crossbar, provided that no infringement of the Laws of the Game has been committed
    previously by the team scoring the goal.
    If the kicking robot is touched by the robot handler in the physical competition or removed from the
    game due to a removal penalty before the ball passes the goal line, the goal does not count. The

910 restart of the play will be a goal kick for the opponents team. If another robot of a team is touched
    by the robot handler in the physical competition or removed from the game before the ball passes
    the goal line and it is not the kicker, the goal counts.
    Note that if a penalized robot scores a goal against its own team, the goal is still considered as valid.
    Winning team

915

    The team scoring the greater number of goals during a match is the winner. If both teams score an
    equal number of goals, or if no goals are scored, the match is drawn.
    Competition rules

920

    When competition rules require there to be a winning team after a match or home-and-away tie, the
    only permitted procedures for determining the winning team are those approved by the International
    F.A. Board, namely:
925 · away goals rule

        · extra time
        · kicks from the penalty mark
        · (new) extended kicks from the penalty mark
    Goal-line technology (GLT) (physical competition only)

930

    GLT systems may be used for the purpose of verifying whether a goal has been scored to support
    the referee's decision. The use of GLT must be stipulated in the respective competition rules.

     35
    (suspended: Law 11 ­ Offside)
935 Offside position

    It is not an offence in itself to be in an offside position. A player is in an offside position if:
        · he is nearer to his opponents' goal line than both the ball and the second-last opponent

940 A player is not in an offside position if:
        · he is in his own half of the field of play or
        · he is level with the second-last opponent or
        · he is level with the last two opponents

    Offence

945

    A player in an offside position is only penalised if, at the moment the ball touches or is played by
    one of his team, he is, in the opinion of the referee, involved in active play by:

        · interfering with play or
950 · interfering with an opponent or

        · gaining an advantage by being in that position
    No offence

955 There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from:
        · a goal kick
        · a throw-in
        · a corner kick

    Infringements and sanctions
960 In the event of an offside offence, the referee awards an indirect free kick to the opposing team to

    be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick).)

     36
    Law 12 ­ Fouls and Misconduct

    Direct and indirect free kicks and penalty kicks can only be awarded for offences and infringements
    committed when the ball is in play.

965 Direct free kick (physical competition)

     A direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if a player commits any of the following offences
     to a player of the opposing team:

970 · uses forceful contact that significantly destabilizes a player, such that walking and/or kicking is
          impeded. Examples for forceful contacts include falling into another player or walking carelessly
          into another player at significant speed.

     · walks into another player for 4 to 5 seconds (even a fallen or getting up player), even if the
       'force to push' is minimal.

975 A free kick is not awarded if one of the following exceptions occurs:

     · The player committing the offence is stationary, including a player that is kicking, provided that
       the ball was close enough where a kick could have succeeded at the start of the kick motion.

     · The player committing the offence is currently getting up.

     · The player committing the offence is the current goal keeper and is currently chasing the ball,

980  in it's own penalty area.

     · Front to front contact between players with the ball between them does not lead to a free kick,
       unless one player walks at a significantly higher speed or with significantly more force that is
       impossible to stand for the other player.

     · Any player proceeding to the ball whose side (i. e. arm, shoulder etc.) who only makes contact

985  with another player is not committing an offence, even if the second player is not proceeding

     to the ball.

     · A player that had an offence committed against himself can not simultaneously be called for a
       free kick offence himself.

    (replaces: A direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if a player commits any of the following
990 seven offences in a manner considered by the referee to be careless, reckless or using excessive force:

     · kicks or attempts to kick an opponent

     · trips or attempts to trip an opponent

     · jumps at an opponent

     · charges an opponent

995 · strikes or attempts to strike an opponent

     · pushes an opponent

     · tackles an opponent)

     A direct free kick is also awarded to the opposing team if a player commits any of the following
     (replaces: three) offences:

     37
1000 · holds an opponent

          · spits at an opponent

          · handles the ball deliberately (except for the goalkeeper within his own penalty area)

          · (new:) holds the ball for more than 5 seconds in a way that the ball cannot be removed from

          the player (a goal keeper may hold the ball up to 6 seconds on the ground or 10 seconds lifted

1005      up with one or both hands, a player performing a throw-in may lift the ball up with both hands

          for up to 10 seconds). More than half of the ball's volume must be outside the convex hull of

          the player, projected to the ground, for the ball to be considered removable. If the ball enters

          the convex hull repeatedly, it must be removable in between for the majority of the time. If

          more than one player of a team is in the vicinity of the ball 2 , the convex hull is taken around

1010      all the player of a team, which prevent removal of the ball. Ball holding offences always occurs

          at the location of the ball.

     (new:) If an offense did not happen within a radius of approx. 1 m around the current ball position,
     or if the ball is not in play, the direct free kick is replaced by a removal penalty. Ball holding leads
     to a free kick independently of the distance between the robots and the ball.

1015 A removal penalty is also applied to any player touching the ball with part of its arm, except for the
     goalkeeper in its own penalty area or a player performing a throw-in.

     A direct free kick is taken from the place where the offence occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free
     kick). (new:) In the physical competition, if moving the ball to the place where the offence occurred
     would be to the disadvantage of the team to which the free kick is awarded, the referee allows play
1020 to continue.

     Direct free kick (virtual competition)

     A direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if a player commits a foul according to the
1025 decision diagram presented in Fig. 4, with the values listed in Table 2.

                                                Table 2: Decision values for the foul detection

                                      Name          Notation value unit

                                      Pushing time  Tp                    1s

                                      Pushing period Tpt                  2s

                                      Vicinity distance Dv                  2m
                                      Distance threshold Dt               0.1 m
                                      Speed threshold st                  0.2 m/s
                                      Direction threshold t               30 deg

      A free kick is not awarded if one of the following exceptions occurs:

          · The player committing the offence is the current goal keeper and is currently chasing the ball,
            in it's own penalty area.

          · A player that had an offence committed against himself can not simultaneously be called for a

1030      free kick offence himself.

          2defined as less than 0.375m in KidSize and 0.75 in AdultSize.

      38
                                 Is R1 committing a forceful contact foul on R2?

               yes               R1 and R2 collide  no                · ownGoalArea(R) denotes if R is in its own
                                                                         goal area

                                                                      · v(R) denotes the speed of the CoM of R
                                                                         (filtered over several simulation steps)

      yes      R1 is Goalkeeper       no            No foul           · movesToBall(R) denotes the fact that

               ownGoalArea(R1)                                             v(R) < st or the angle between v(R) and RB

                                                                           is below t.

      No foul  yes               R2 is Goalkeeper   no                · When a decision node contain multiple lines,
                                                                         all should be satisfied

                                 ownGoalArea(R2)

               Foul              yes             R1 and R2 have                              no
                                               been in collision for                                          no

                                                Tp in the last Tpt                      |v(R1)| > st

               yes               R1B < Dv      no                     yes

                       R1B - R2B > Dt

               Foul                            No foul                                                    No foul
                                                                     R1B < Dv
                  yes                                                                   no

      yes movesToBall(R2)                  no                              yes   |v(R1)| - |v(R2)| > st  no

               ¬movesToBall(R1)

      Foul             yes movesToBall(R1) no                              Foul                          No foul

                                 movesToBall(R2)

                                 R1B - R2B > Dt

                       Foul                         No foul

      Figure 4: Is robot R1 committing a forceful contact foul on R2? This decision diagram is applied on every
      couple of robots from opposing teams.

      A direct free kick is also awarded to the opposing team if a player commits the following offence:

      · (new:) holds the ball for more than 5 seconds in a way that the ball cannot be removed from

      the player (a goal keeper may hold the ball up to 6 seconds on the ground or 10 seconds lifted

      up with one or both hands, a player performing a throw-in may lift the ball up with one or

1035  both hands for up to 10 seconds). More than half of the ball's volume must be outside the

      convex hull of the player, projected to the ground, for the ball to be considered removable. If

      the ball enters the convex hull repeatedly, it must be removable in between for the majority of

      the time. If more than one player of a team is in the vicinity of the ball3 , the convex hull is

      taken around all the player of a team, which prevent removal of the ball. Ball holding offences

1040  always occurs at the location of the ball.

      (new:) If an offense did not happen within a radius of approx. 1 m around the current ball position,
      or if the ball is not in play, the direct free kick is replaced by a removal penalty. Ball holding leads
      to a free kick independently of the distance between the robots and the ball.

          3defined as less than 0.375m in KidSize and 0.75 in AdultSize.

      39
     A removal penalty is also applied to any player touching the ball with part of its arm, except for the
1045 goalkeeper in its own penalty area or a player performing a throw-in.

     A direct free kick is taken from the place where the offence occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free
     kick).

     Penalty kick

1050

     A penalty kick (new) as defined by Law 14 is awarded if any of the above (replaces: ten) offences is
     committed by a player inside his own penalty area, irrespective of the position of the ball, provided
     it is in play.

     Indirect free kick

1055

     An indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team if a goalkeeper, inside his own penalty area,
     commits any of the following four offences:

        · controls the ball with his hands for more than ten seconds before releasing it from his possession
1060 · touches the ball again with his hands after he has released it from his possession and before it

           has touched another player
        · touches the ball with his hands after it has been deliberately kicked to him by a team-mate
        · touches the ball with his hands after he has received it directly from a throw-in taken by a

           team-mate

1065 In the physical competition, an indirect free kick is also awarded to the opposing team if, in the
     opinion of the referee, a player:

        · plays in a dangerous manner
        · impedes the progress of an opponent
        · prevents the goalkeeper from releasing the ball from his hands
1070 · commits any other offence, not previously mentioned in Law 12, for which play is stopped to

           caution or send off a player

     (new:) In the physical competition, if an offense did not happen within a radius of approx. 1 m
     around the current ball position, the indirect free kick is replaced by a removal penalty.

     The indirect free kick is taken from the place where the offence occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position
1075 of free kick). (new:) In the physical competition, if moving the ball to the place where the offence

     occurred would be to the disadvantage of the team to which the free kick is awarded, the referee
     allows play to continue.

     Disciplinary sanctions

1080

     The yellow card is used to communicate that a player, substitute or substituted player has been
     cautioned.

      40
     In the virtual competition, the Technical Committee may use yellow cards to communicate that a
     team has been cautioned.

1085 The red card is used to communicate that a player, substitute or substituted player has been sent
     off.
     In the virtual competition, the Technical Committee may use red cards to communicate that a team
     has been excluded from the tournament.

     Only a player, substitute or substituted player and in case of a virtual tournament a team may be
1090 shown the red or yellow card.

     The referee has the authority to take disciplinary sanctions from the moment he enters the field of
     play until he leaves the field of play after the final whistle (in the physical competition) or the game is
     started until the game was declared finished by the autonomous referee (in the virtual competition).
     In the virtual competition, the Technical Committee has the authority to take disciplinary sanctions
1095 against a team at any point during the tournament and in particular after a simulated game has
     been played and before the result was certified by the Technical Committee.

     A player who or a team that commits a cautionable or sending-off offence, either on or off the field
     of play, whether directed towards an opponent, a team-mate, the referee, an assistant referee or any
     other person, is disciplined according to the nature of the offence committed.

1100 Cautionable offences

     A player is cautioned and shown the yellow card if he commits any of the following seven offences:
        · unsporting behaviour (physical competition only)

1105 · dissent by word or action (physical competition only)
        · persistent infringement of the Laws of the Game (physical competition only)
        · delaying the restart of play (physical competition only)
        · (suspended: failure to respect the required distance when play is restarted with a corner kick,
           free kick or throw-in)

1110 · entering or re-entering the field of play without the referee's permission
        · (suspended: deliberately leaving the field of play without the referee's permission)
        · receiving a second official warning from the referee

     In a physical competition, a substitute or substituted player is cautioned if he commits any of the
     following three offences:
1115 · unsporting behaviour

        · dissent by word or action
        · delaying the restart of play

     Sending-off offences

1120

     A player, substitute or substituted player is sent off if he commits any of the following offences:

      41
        · serious foul play (physical competition only)
        · violent conduct (physical competition only)
        · spitting at an opponent or any other person (physical competition only)
1125 · denying the opposing team a goal or an obvious goalscoring opportunity by deliberately handling

           the ball (this does not apply to a goalkeeper within his own penalty area) (physical competition
           only)
        · (suspended: denying an obvious goalscoring opportunity to an opponent moving towards the
           player's goal by an offence punishable by a free kick or a penalty kick)
1130 · using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or gestures (physical competition only)
        · receiving a second caution in the same match
     In a virtual competition, a team is shown the red card and excluded from the tournament if it
     commits one of the following offences:
        · using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or gestures
1135 · receiving a second caution in the same tournament
     In the physical competition, a player, substitute or substituted player who has been sent off must
     leave the vicinity of the field of play and the technical area.

      42
     Law 13 ­ Free Kicks

     Types of free kick

1140

     Free kicks are either direct or indirect.

     The direct free kick

1145

     Ball enters the goal:
        · if a direct free kick is kicked directly into the opponents' goal, a goal is awarded
        · if a direct free kick is kicked directly into the team's own goal, a corner kick is awarded to the
           opposing team

1150 The indirect free kick

     (suspended: Signal
     The referee indicates an indirect free kick by raising his arm above his head. He maintains his arm
1155 in that position until the kick has been taken and the ball has touched another player or goes out
     of play.)

     Ball enters the goal
     A goal can be scored only if the ball is either kicked and clearly moves as determined by the referee4
     or has been touched by another player before being kicked into the goal (replaces: subsequently
1160 touches another player before it enters the goal):

        · if an indirect free kick is kicked directly into the opponents' goal, a goal kick is awarded
        · if an indirect free kick is kicked directly into the team's own goal, a corner kick is awarded to

           the opposing team

     Procedure

1165

     All free kicks are taken from the place where the offence occurred, except:
        · indirect free kicks to the attacking team for an offence inside the opponents' penalty area are
           taken from the nearest point on the penalty area line which runs parallel to the goal line.

1170 · in the physical competition, free kicks to the defending team in their goal area may be taken
           from anywhere in that area

     The ball:
        · must be stationary (suspended: and the kicker must not touch the ball again until it has
           touched another player)

            4In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered clearly moving.

      43
1175 · is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves as determined by the referee5 except for a free
           kick to the defending team in their penalty area where the ball is in play when it is kicked
           directly out of the penalty area. (new): In both cases the the ball is also considered in play 10
           seconds after the referee gave the signal.

     Until the ball is in play all opponents must remain:

1180 · at least 0.75m for KidSize and 1.5m for AdultSize (replaces: 9.15 m (10 yds)) from the ball
           until it is in play, unless they are on their own goal line between the goalposts

        · outside the penalty area for free kicks inside the opponents' penalty area

     The referee blows the whistle (physical competition only), announces 'Free-Kick' blue or red and
     communicates "Direct / Indirect Free Kick" Blue/Red to the GameController or the assistant referee
1185 operating the GameController. The referee places the ball depending on the call and announces
     "Free Kick Ready" and communicates "Prepare Direct / Indirect Free Kick" Blue/Red to the Game-
     Controller or the assistant referee operating the GameController. The player taking the free kick has
     up to 30 seconds to position themselves for the free kick. In the virtual competition, any player from
     the team taking the free kick may announce that the player is ready to take the free kick at any
1190 point by sending a message to the GameController. In the physical competition, the robot handler
     of the team taking the free kick can announce to the referee that the player is ready to take the
     free kick.
     Players are guaranteed at least 15 seconds to move away from the ball. They may take up to 30
     seconds if the team taking the free kick has not announced their robot is ready to take the kick
1195 off. Any opponent robot still illegally positioned is considered as an incapable player and must be
     removed from the field for 3010 seconds removal penalty. The referee may decide to execute the
     free kick before 15 seconds have passed if the team taking the free kick have announced their robot
     is ready and if no opponent is illegally positioned. Once the free kick can be executed, the referee
     blows the whistle (physical competition only) and communicates "Execute Direct / Indirect Free
1200 Kick" Blue/Red to the GameController or the assistant referee operating the GameController.

     Infringements and sanctions

     If, when a free kick is taken, an opponent is closer to the ball than the required distance:

1205 · the opponent receives a 3010 second removal penalty (replaces: the kick is retaken)

     In a physical competition, if when a free kick is taken by the defending team from inside its own
     penalty area, the ball is not kicked directly out of the penalty area:

        · the kick is retaken (new:) if the goal keeper managed to reach the ball within the time frame.
           Otherwise, the ball is in play again.

1210 (suspended:) Free kick taken by a player other than the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it has
     touched another player:

        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1215 (suspended:) If, after the ball is in play, the kicker deliberately handles the ball before it has touched
     another player:

            5In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered clearly moving.

      44
        · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

        · a penalty kick is awarded if the infringement occurred inside the kicker's penalty area

1220 (suspended:) Free kick taken by the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper touches the ball again (except with his hands), before it
     has touched another player:
        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1225 (suspended:) If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper deliberately handles the ball before it has
     touched another player:
        · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred outside the
           goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
           Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1230 · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred inside the
           goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
           Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     (new) If a free kick was awarded to team A and any player of team A touches the ball before the
     referee announced the execution of the free kick:
1235 · The ball is in play.

        · The player touching the ball received a warning. For the second warning, the player received a
           yellow card. For the fourth warning, the player receives a second yellow card.

     (new) If a free kick was awarded to team A and any player of team B touches the ball before the
     referee announced the execution of the free kick:
1240 · The free kick is retaken.

        · The player touching the ball received a warning. For the second warning, the player received a
           yellow card. For the fourth warning, the player receives a second yellow card.

      45
     Law 14 ­ The Penalty Kick

     A penalty kick is awarded against a team that commits one of the (replaces: ten) offences for which
1245 a direct free kick is awarded, inside its own penalty area and while the ball is in play.

     A goal may be scored directly from a penalty kick.

     (suspended: Additional time is allowed for a penalty kick to be taken at the end of each half or at
     the end of periods of extra time.)

     Position of the ball and the players

1250

     The ball:
        · must be placed on the penalty mark.

     (new:) During penalty shoot-out, the player taking the penalty kick:
1255 · must be properly identified (in the physical competition only)

     The defending goalkeeper:
        · must remain on or behind his goal line facing the kicker in the physical competition. In the
           virtual competition, it may be facing any direction. In any case, it needs to stay between the
           goalposts until the ball has been kicked

1260 The Kicker:
        · must be placed inside the field of play
        · must be placed behind the penalty mark

     The players other than the kicker must be:
        · inside the field of play

1265 · (suspended: outside the penalty area)
        · behind the penalty mark
        · at least 0.75m for KidSize and 1.5m for AdultSize from the penalty mark (replaces: 9.15m)

      Procedure

1270

     If a penalty kick is taken during the normal course of play the same procedure as in regular direct
     free kicks is applied.

      During penalty shoot-out:

          · In the physical competition, after the players have taken positions in accordance with this law,

1275      the referee signals for the penalty kick to be taken

          · In the virtual competition, the referee spawns the kicker and the goalkeeper.

          · The player taking the penalty kick must kick the ball forward

      46
        · (suspended: He must not play the ball again until it has touched another player)
        · The ball is in play when it is kicked and moves forward6
1280 (replaces:) When a penalty kick is taken during the normal course of play, or time has been extended
     at half-time or full time to allow a penalty kick to be taken or retaken, a goal is awarded if, before
     passing between the goalposts and under the crossbar:
        · the ball touches either or both of the goalposts and/or the crossbar and/or the goalkeeper

     The trial ends after 60 seconds. It may be extended until the ball comes to a complete stop if the
1285 ball is still moving at the time the 60 seconds are over. The trial also ends if the ball stops being

     entirely inside the goal area or leaves the field.

     (replaces:) The referee decides when a penalty kick has been completed.)

     Infringements and sanctions

1290

     The same infringements and sanctions as in regular direct free kicks are applied.

     (replaces:) If the referee gives the signal for a penalty kick to be taken and, before the ball is in
     play, one of the following occurs:
     the player taking the penalty kick infringes the Laws of the Game:
1295 · the referee allows the kick to be taken

        · if the ball enters the goal, the kick is retaken
        · if the ball does not enter the goal, the referee stops play and the match is restarted with an

           indirect free kick to the defending team from the place where the infringement occurred

     the goalkeeper infringes the Laws of the Game:
1300 · the referee allows the kick to be taken

        · if the ball enters the goal, a goal is awarded
        · if the ball does not enter the goal, the kick is retaken

     a team-mate of the player taking the kick infringes the Laws of the Game:
        · the referee allows the kick to be taken

1305 · if the ball enters the goal, the kick is retaken
        · if the ball does not enter the goal, the referee stops play and the match is restarted with an
           indirect free kick to the defending team from the place where the infringement occurred

     a team-mate of the goalkeeper infringes the Laws of the Game:
        · the referee allows the kick to be taken

1310 · if the ball enters the goal, a goal is awarded

            6In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered moving forward.

      47
          · if the ball does not enter the goal, the kick is retaken

      a player of both the defending team and the attacking team infringe the Laws of the Game:
         · the kick is retaken

     If, after the penalty kick has been taken:
1315 the kicker touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it has touched another player:

        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, the kick to be taken from the place
           where the infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of Free Kick)

      the kicker deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another player:

          · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the

1320      infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      the ball is touched by an outside agent as it moves forward:
         · the kick is retaken

     the ball rebounds into the field of play from the goalkeeper, the crossbar or the goalposts and is
     then touched by an outside agent:

1325 · the referee stops play

        · play is restarted with a dropped ball at the place where it touched the outside agent, unless it
           touched the outside agent inside the goal area, in which case the referee drops the ball on the
           goal area line parallel to the goal line at the point nearest to where the ball was located when
           play was stopped)

      48
1330 Law 15 ­ The Throw-In

     A throw-in is a method of restarting play.

     A throw-in is awarded to the opponents of the player who last touched the ball when the whole of
     the ball crosses the touch line, either on the ground or in the air.

     A goal cannot be scored directly from a throw-in:
1335 · if the ball enters the opponents' goal - a goal kick is awarded

        · if the ball enters the thrower's goal - a corner kick is awarded

     Procedure

1340 If the ball leaves the field it will be replaced on the field by the referee or an assistant referee. If the
     whole of the ball passes over a touch line the ball is placed on the touch line directly at the point
     at which the ball left the field.

     Balls are deemed to be out based on the team that last touched the ball, irrespective of who actually
     kicked the ball.

1345 After placing the ball, the same procedure and rules of executing a indirect free kick apply. Robots
     are also allowed to perform the throw-in with their hands, in this case: (replaces: At the moment
     of delivering the ball, the thrower:)
        · faces the field of play (in the physical competition only)
        · has part of each foot either on the touch line or on the ground outside the touch line

1350 · holds the ball with both hands in the physical competition and at least one hand in the virtual
           competition

        · delivers the ball from behind and over his head (in the physical competition only)
        · (suspended: delivers the ball from the point where it left the field of play)
        · releases the ball within 10 seconds
1355 If a robot tries to perform a throw-in with hands and fails to respect the rules, a free-kick is awarded
     to the opponent team.

     (suspended: All opponents must stand no less than 2 m (2 yds) from the point at which the throw-in
     is taken.

     The ball is in play when it enters the field of play.

1360 After delivering the ball, the thrower must not touch the ball again until it has touched another
     player.)

     Infringements and sanctions

1365 (suspended: Throw-in taken by a player other than the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the thrower touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it has
     touched another player:

      49
        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1370 If, after the ball is in play, the thrower deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
     player:
        · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)
        · a penalty kick is awarded if the infringement occurred inside the thrower's penalty area

1375 Throw-in taken by the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper touches the ball again (except with his hands), before it
     has touched another player:
        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1380 If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
     player:
        · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred outside the
           goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
           Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1385 · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred inside the
           goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
           Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     If an opponent unfairly distracts or impedes the thrower:
        · he is cautioned for unsporting behaviour

1390 For any other infringement of this Law:
        · the throw-in is taken by a player of the opposing team)

      50
     Law 16 ­ The Goal Kick

     A goal kick is a method of restarting play.

     A goal kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, either on the ground or
1395 in the air, having last touched a player of the attacking team, and a goal is not scored in accordance

     with Law 10.

     A goal may be scored directly from a goal kick, but only against the opposing team. If the ball
     directly enters the kicker's goal a corner kick is awarded to the opponents if the ball left the penalty
     area.

1400 Procedure

     If the ball leaves the field it will be replaced on the field by the referee or an assistant referee. If
     the whole of the ball passes over the goal line the ball is placed on the touch line at the intersection
1405 with the centre line on the side of the field the ball went out.

     Balls are deemed to be out based on the team that last touched the ball, irrespective of who actually
     kicked the ball.

     After placing the ball, the same procedure and rules of executing a direct free kick apply.

     (replaces:
1410 · The ball is kicked from any point within the goal area by a player of the defending team

        · Opponents remain outside the penalty area until the ball is in play
        · The kicker must not play the ball again until it has touched another player
        · The ball is in play when it is kicked directly out of the penalty area)

     Infringements and sanctions

1415

     (suspended: If the ball is not kicked directly out of the penalty area from a goal kick:
        · the kick is retaken

     Goal kick taken by a player other than the goalkeeper
1420 If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it has

     touched another player:
        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     If, after the ball is in play, the kicker deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
1425 player:

        · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      51
          · a penalty kick is awarded if the infringement occurred inside the kicker's penalty area

     Goal kick taken by the goalkeeper
1430 If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it

     has touched another player:

        · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

     If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
1435 player:

          · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred outside the
            goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
            Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

          · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred inside the

1440      goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see

          Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      In the event of any other infringement of this Law:
         · the kick is retaken)

      52
     Law 17 ­ The Corner Kick

1445 A corner kick is a method of restarting play.

     A corner kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, either on the ground or
     in the air, having last touched a player of the defending team, and a goal is not scored in accordance
     with Law 10.

     A goal may be scored directly from a corner kick, but only against the opposing team; if the ball
1450 directly enters the kicker's goal a corner kick is awarded to the opponents.

     Procedure

     If the ball leaves the field it will be replaced on the field by the referee or an assistant referee. If the
1455 whole of the ball passes over the goal line the ball is placed on the corner on the side of the field

     the ball went out.

      Balls are deemed to be out based on the team that last touched the ball, irrespective of who actually
      kicked the ball.

      After placing the ball, the same procedure and rules of executing a direct free kick apply.

1460 (replaces:

          · The ball must be placed inside the corner arc nearest to the point where the ball crossed the
            goal line

          · The corner flagpost must not be moved

          · Opponents must remain at least 1 m from the corner arc until the ball is in play (replaces:

1465      Opponents must remain at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the corner arc until the ball is in play )

          · The ball must be kicked by a player of the attacking team

          · The ball is in play when it is kicked and moves

          · The kicker must not play the ball again until it has touched another player)

     Infringements and sanctions

1470

     (suspended: Corner kick taken by a player other than the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it has
     touched another player:

1475 · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      If, after the ball is in play, the kicker deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
      player:

          · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the

1480      infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      53
          · a penalty kick is awarded if the infringement occurred inside the kicker's penalty area

     Corner kick taken by the goalkeeper
     If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper touches the ball again (except with his hands) before it
     has touched another player:

1485 · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team, to be taken from the place where the
           infringement occurred (see Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

      If, after the ball is in play, the goalkeeper deliberately handles the ball before it has touched another
      player:

          · a direct free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred outside the

1490      goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see

          Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

          · an indirect free kick is awarded to the opposing team if the infringement occurred inside the
            goalkeeper's penalty area, to be taken from the place where the infringement occurred (see
            Law 13 ­ Position of free kick)

1495 In the event of any other infringement:
        · the kick is retaken)

      54
     PROCEDURES TO DETERMINE THE WINNER OF A MATCH OR HOME-AND-
     AWAY

     Away goals, extra time, kicks from the penalty mark and extended kicks from the penalty mark are
1500 the four methods approved for determining the winning team where competition rules require there

     to be a winning team after a match has been drawn.

     Away goals
     Competition rules may provide that where teams play each other home and away, if the aggregate
     score is equal after the second match, any goals scored at the ground of the opposing team will
1505 count double.

     Extra time
     Competition rules may provide for two further equal periods, not exceeding 5 minutes each, to be
     played. The conditions of Law 8 will apply. (replaces: Competition rules may provide for two further
     equal periods, not exceeding 15 minutes each, to be played. The conditions of Law 8 will apply. )

1510 Kicks from the penalty mark
     Procedure

          · The referee randomly7 chooses the goal at which the kicks will be taken.

1515 · In the virtual competition, the referee randomly chooses a team to perform the first penalty
           kick. In the physical competition, the referee tosses a coin and the team whose captain wins
           the toss decides whether to take the first or the second kick.

          · The referee keeps a record of the kicks being taken

          · Subject to the conditions explained below, both teams take five kicks

1520 · The kicks are taken alternately by the teams

          · In the virtual competition, at the beginning of every kick, the kicker and the goalkeeper are
            spawned at a position specified by their team according to Law 14.

          · If, before both teams have taken five kicks, one has scored more goals than the other could
            score, even if it were to complete its five kicks, no more kicks are taken

1525 · (suspended: If, after both teams have taken five kicks, both have scored the same number of
           goals, or have not scored any goals, kicks continue to be taken in the same order until one
           team has scored a goal more than the other from the same number of kicks)

          · In the physical competition, a goalkeeper who is injured while kicks are being taken from the

          penalty mark and is unable to continue as goalkeeper may be replaced by a named substitute

1530      provided his team has not used the maximum number of substitutes permitted under the

          competition rules

          · With the exception of the foregoing case, only players who are on the field of play at the end

          of the match in a physical competition, which includes extra time where appropriate, (new) or

          which are serving their 3010 second penalty time or are currently in service, are eligible to take

1535      kicks from the penalty mark

          7In the physical competition, a coin toss will be used for taking the random decision.

      55
        · (suspended: Each kick is taken by a different player and all eligible players must take a kick
           before any player can take a second kick)

        · In the physical competition, an eligible player may change places with the goalkeeper at any
           time when kicks from the penalty mark are being taken

1540 · Only the eligible players and match officials are permitted to remain on the field of play when
           kicks from the penalty mark are being taken during a physical match.

        · suspended: The goalkeeper who is the team-mate of the kicker must remain on the field of
           play, outside the penalty area in which the kicks. All players, except the player taking the kick
           and the two goalkeepers, must remain within the centre circle)

1545 · suspended: The goalkeeper who is the team-mate of the kicker must remain on the field of
           play, outside the penalty area in which the kicks are being taken, on the goal line where it
           meets the penalty area boundary line)

        · Unless otherwise stated, the relevant Laws of the Game and International F.A. Board Decisions
           apply when kicks from the penalty mark are being taken

1550 · (suspended: If at the end of the match and before the kicks start to be taken from the penalty
           mark, one team has a greater number of players than its opponents, it must reduce its numbers
           to equate with that of its opponents and the team captain must inform the referee of the name
           and number of each player excluded. Any player thus excluded may not participate in kicks
           from the penalty mark.

1555 · (suspended: Before the start of kicks from the penalty mark, the referee must ensure that an
           equal number of players from each team remains within the centre circle and they shall take
           the kicks

     Extended kicks from the penalty mark (new)

     Procedure

1560

          · All penalty shoots are taken on an empty goal.

          · The player performing the penalty kick may enter the goal area.

          · The team wins which...

1565      1. ... kicked the ball into the goal / scores more often. If this is a tie:

          2. ... kicked the ball into the goal area more often. If this is a tie:

          3. ... touched the ball in a larger number of the performed trials. If this is a tie:

          4. ... in sum needed less time to score the goals. If this is a tie:

          5. ... in sum needed less time to kick the ball into the goal area. If this is a tie:

1570      6. ... in sum needed less time to touch the ball

          · If this is a tie a coin is flipped by the Technical Committee.

      56
     THE TECHNICAL AREA (physical competition only)
     The technical area relates to matches played in stadiums with a designated seated area for technical
     staff and substitutes as described below.
1575 While the size and position of technical areas may differ between stadiums, the following notes are
     issued for general guidance:

        · the technical area extends 1 m (1 yd) on either side of the designated seated area and extends
           forward up to a distance of 1 m (1 yd) from the touch line

        · it is recommended that markings are used to define this area
1580 · the number of persons permitted to occupy the technical area is defined by the competition

           rules
        · the occupants of the technical area are identified before the beginning of the match in accor-

           dance with the competition rules
        · only one person at a time is authorised to convey tactical instructions from the technical area
1585 · the coach and other officials must remain within its confines except in special circumstances,

           e.g. a physiotherapist or doctor entering the field of play, with the referee's permission, to
           assess an injured player
        · the coach and other occupants of the technical area must behave in a responsible manner

      57
     THE FOURTH OFFICIAL AND THE RESERVE ASSISTANT REFEREE (physical com-
1590 petition only)

          · A fourth official may be appointed under the competition rules and officiates if any of the three
            match officials is unable to continue, unless a reserve assistant referee is appointed. They assist
            the referee at all times

          · Prior to the start of the competition, the organiser states clearly whether, if the referee is

1595      unable to continue, the fourth official takes over as the referee or whether the senior assistant

          referee takes over as referee with the fourth official becoming an assistant referee

          · The fourth official assists with any administrative duties before, during and after the match,
            as required by the referee

          · They are responsible for assisting with substitution procedures during the match

1600 · They have the authority to check the equipment of substitutes before they enter the field of
           play. If their equipment does not comply with the Laws of the Game, they inform the referee

          · They supervise the replacement balls, where required. If the match ball has to be replaced
            during a match, they provide another ball, on the instruction of the referee, thus keeping the
            delay to a minimum

1605 · They assist the referee to control the match in accordance with the Laws of the Game. The
           referee, however, retains the authority to decide on all points connected with play.

          · After the match, the fourth official must submit a report to the appropriate authorities on any

          misconduct or other incident that occurred out of the view of the referee and the assistant

          referees. The fourth official must advise the referee and their assistants of any report being

1610      made

          · They have the authority to inform the referee of irresponsible behaviour by any occupant of
            the technical area

          · A reserve assistant referee may also be appointed under competition rules. Their only duty shall

          be to replace an assistant referee who is unable to continue or to replace the fourth official, as

1615      required

      58
     THE ADDITIONAL ASSISTANT REFEREE (physical competition only)
     Additional assistant referees may be appointed under the competition rules. They must be active
     referees of the highest category available. The competition rules must state the procedure to be
     followed when a referee is unable to continue, and whether:
1620 1. the fourth official takes over as the referee, or

       2. the senior additional assistant referee takes over as the referee, with the fourth official becoming
           an additional assistant referee

     Duties

1625

     Where appointed, the additional assistant referees, subject to the decision of the referee, are to
     indicate:

        · when the whole of the ball leaves the field of play over the goal line
        · which team is entitled to a corner kick or goal kick
1630 · when misconduct or any other incident occurs out of the view of the referee
        · when offences have been committed whenever the additional assistant referees have a better

           view than the referee, particularly inside the penalty area
        · whether, at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off the goal line before the ball is kicked and

           if the ball crosses the line
1635 Assistance

     The additional assistant referees also help the referee to control the match in accordance with the
     Laws of the Game but the final decision will always be taken by the referee. In the event of undue
1640 interference or improper conduct, the referee will relieve an additional assistant referee of their duties
     and make a report to the appropriate authorities.

      59
  Interpretation of the Laws of the Game
  and Guidelines for Referees

    Please see the respective FIFA documents.

1645 (e.g. pp. 60 of http://resources.fifa.com/mm/document/footballdevelopment/refereeing/02/36/01/11/lawsofthegameweben_neutral.pdf)

      60
                      Section II
        RoboCup Humanoid League

               Competition Rules

61
     The Competitions and Trophies

1650 Setup and Inspections (physical competition)

     The competitions in the Humanoid League are preceded by a setup and inspection period of at
     least 24 h. During this time, every robot will be inspected by the league organizing committee
1655 for compliance with the design rules detailed in Law 4. Robots need to demonstrate the ability to
     walk (all sub-leagues) and stand up from front and back (KidSize). The teams must be able to
     demonstrate at least one successful stand-up action from each side during the robot inspection. All
     robots will be photographed during the inspection. A re-inspection becomes necessary after any
     change that could affect the compliance to the design rules. A re-inspection might be requested by
1660 any team leader up to 1 hour prior to a game.

     Setup and Inspections (virtual competition)

     Teams who do not want their robot model to be shared publicly should provide a non-disclosure
1665 agreement to the Technical Committee. This agreement will have to be signed by every team

     requesting access to the robot model, for reviewing or inspection.
     The virtual competitions in the Humanoid League are preceded by a setup and inspection period.
     Teams need to submit a first draft of a file containing their robot model three weeks before the
     tournament. During the following week, every robot will be inspected by the league organizing
1670 committee for compliance with the design rules detailed in Law 4. Teams will then receive feedback
     and are granted a period of one week to change the robot model to be compliant with the laws of the
     game. A final file containing the robot model needs to be submitted at latest one week before the
     competition. A re-inspection becomes necessary after any change that could affect the compliance
     to the design rules. Changes to the robot model made less than one week before the tournament
1675 need to be submitted by e-mail to the Organizing Committee. The e-mail needs to contain the new
     file containing the robot model as well as a summary of the changes made and a justification for
     performing the changes. A re-inspection might be requested by any team leader and is guaranteed
     to be evaluated if submitted up to 12 hours prior to a game.

     Referee Duty (physical competition only)

1680

     Each team must name at least one person who is familiar with the rules and who might be assigned
     for referee duties and for the technical inspection by the league organizing committee.

     Competitions

1685

     The competitions consist of:

       1. Regular tournament for KidSize (4 vs. 4),
       2. Regular tournament for AdultSize (2 vs. 2)(3 vs. 3),
1690 3. Drop-In games for KidSize and AdultSize (physical competition only)
       4. Technical challenges (physical competition only).

      62
     While teams do require only 1 robot to participate to the Drop-In, they need to present a full roster
     of robots for the soccer games8. During robot inspection, teams have to announce how many robots
     they can provide.
1695 After Drop-In:

        · Teams which cannot provide a full roster have to form a full team with one or more other
           teams from the same league to present a full roster.

        · Teams which can provide a full roster are allowed to play as a full team on their own, but can
           also join other teams to form a combined team.

1700 In case one or more teams are left and the total number of their robots is not sufficient to form a
     full roster, they are still allowed to play as a full team.
     This ensures that:

        · any team who registers to a physical competition can compete in the regular tournament,
           independently of the number of robots they bring.

1705 · any team who brings a full roster is not required to merge with another team for the regular
           tournament of a physical competition.

     Physical competitions start with the Drop-In tournament. The scores of the teams during the Drop-
     In tournament are used to establish a preliminary ranking used for seeding teams in the different
     round robins groups. If multiple teams join to form a full team, only the best score of the teams
1710 composing the full team is used 9.

     If at least 16 full teams participate in a league, the teams are separated in two different divisions
     for the regular tournamentTeams are separated into 4 round robin groups A, B, C, D according to
     their ranking in Drop-in games:

        · The best N full teams are qualified for the first round robin of division A 10.

1715 · The other full teams are qualified for the first round robin of division B.

        · group A composed from teams ranked 1, 8, 9, 16, 17, 24, . . .

        · group B composed from teams ranked 2, 7, 10, 15, 18, 23, . . .

        · group C composed from teams ranked 3, 6, 11, 14, 19, 22, . . .

        · group D composed from teams ranked 4, 5, 12, 13, 20, 21, . . .

1720 If less than 12 teams participate in a league, the number of groups is reduced so that each group
     contains at least three teams, and two rounds of round robin will be played.
     Round robin games are followed by round of 16 elimination games, Quarter Final games, Semifinal
     games, 3rd Place game and Final game.

     In the virtual competition, the qualification for division A and division B as well as the seeding for the
1725 round robin groups is determined prior to the first game of the main tournament. It may be based

     on an initial round of games, penalty shoot-outs, results from the previous RoboCup competition,
     or another similarly appropriate method determined by the Organizing Committee. The method of
     seeding needs to be announced at least one month prior to the start of the tournament.

            84 in KidSize, 2 in AdultSize
            9If the three teams A,B and C participate in the drop-in tournament, receive respectively 3.2, 4.5 and -1.6 points and form a
       full team, the score of their full team will be 4.5.
          10N is either 8 or 12 depending on the number of full teams and has to be announced before the beginning of the tournament.

      63
     Both divisions play separate round robins. The lowest ranked teams per group in division A will have
1730 a playoff with the highest ranked teams per group in division B. The winners of the playoff games

     are qualified for the second round robin of division A, the losers will play the second round robin in
     division B.
     Thereafter, division A and division B proceed independently of each other and each will normally
     consist of a round robin stage, followed by a number of knockout matches.

1735 In case there is less than 16 full teams, there is only one division with a first round robin and a
     number of knock-out games.

      Teams that are eliminated in the round of 16 instead participate in the consolation bracket. The
      winning team of the consoltaion bracket may be awarded a certificate.

     For the AdultSize soccer games of a physical competiton, a specific rule for robot handlers applies.
1740 For every robot, one robot handler is allowed to stay near the robot such that the robot handler

     does not interfere with the game. Specifically, the robot handler:

      · should position himself behind the robot at a distance of at least an arm length away from the
        robot's convex hull.

      · must not block the vision of any of the robots on the ball or goals.

1745 · must not block the path of any robot.

      · must not touch any robot. Touching a robot is considered an offence that is penalised by a
        removal penalty of the robot handler's own robot according to the laws of the game.

      · must not enter the radius of one arm length around the robot unless the robot is to be picked

      up or to avoid interference with the game. Violation of this rule results in a warning to the

1750  respective robot handler. After two warnings, the robot handler needs to be replaced similarly

      to the rule specified under "Request for Pick-up".

      · has to be dressed in black clothes.

      · may not communicate with the robot in any way, including verbally, while the robot is in play.

     After games of a round robin have been played, the teams of a group are ranked based on (in
1755 decreasing priority):

       1. the number of earned points,
       2. the goal-difference,
       3. the absolute number of goals,
       4. the result of a direct match,
1760 5. the time needed to score a penalty kick into an empty goal (up to five alternating attempts to

           score, until at least one team scored),
       6. the drawing of a lot.

     At least two teams of every group will enter the next round robin or the playoffs.

     In the knock-out games of a tournament two further equal periods of 5 minutes each are played
1765 if the game is not decided after the regular playing time. After consulting the team captains, the

      64
     referee can decide to skip the extra time and continue the game immediately with the five alternating
     penalty kick trials in the physical competition. If both teams agree, the regular penalty kick trials
     may be skipped and the extended penalty kick procedure applies instead.

     The game plan needs to be announced prior to the start of the tournament.

1770 Forfeits

      A team that forfeits is disqualified from the competition. Forfeiting is defined as refusing to make
      a good faith effort to participate in a scheduled game11.

1775 · If a team chooses to forfeit a match in the round robin games the other team plays on an
           empty goal.

      · If a team chooses to forfeit in a knock-out game before the quarter final, the other team
        continues in the competition.

      · If a team chooses to forfeit in the quarter finals, it will be replaced by the runner up team in

1780  the round robin group that included the forfeiting team.

      · If a team chooses to forfeit in the semi finals or the game for 3rd and 4th place, it will be
        replaced by the team that lost to the forfeiting team in the quarter finals.

      · A team forfeiting the final match should announce its decision at least 30 minutes before

      the start of the 3rd vs 4th final. The league organization committee may impose a one year

1785  disqualification of the team and its members in case of avoidable delayed announcements.

      · If a team chooses to forfeit the final after the game for 3rd and 4th place began, it will be
        replaced by the 3rd place winner, and the 4th place winner will be 3rd place. No new 4th place
        will be selected.

      · If a team chooses to forfeit the final before the game for 3rd and 4th place, it will be replaced

1790  by the team that lost to the forfeiting team in the previous semi-finals. The team that lost

      to the forfeiting team in the previous semi-finals (i.e. the one initially being qualified for the

      game for 3rd and 4th place) will be replaced for the game for 3rd and 4th place by the team

      that lost to it in the respective quarter final.

     Gameplay

1795

     In the virtual competition, a time period of 15 seconds is granted to teams between the start of the
     half time or penalty shoot-out and the beginning of the kick-off procedure.

     Kick-off procedure

1800 · The referee gives the signal "READY" that all robots have to reach their own half of the field.
           During this phase, handlers are not allowed to interfere with the robots.

        · After a period between 15 and 45 seconds the referee gives the signal "SET". In the virtual
           competition, the time of this phase is always 45 seconds. The referee calls robots illegally
           positioned to be removed. Handlers are not allowed to remove or touch the legally positioned

          11If robots are broken in the physical competition, then they should be placed on the field anyway. In the virtual competition, if
       the software is currently not running properly, a version should be submitted anyway as an indication that the team is willing to
       participate.

      65
1805      robots. The robot playing the goal keeper has to be announced before the beginning of the

          game. Illegally positioned players do not suffer a removal penalty and are allowed to enter the

          field as soon as the game starts.

          · The opponents of the team taking the kick-off are outside the centre circle until the ball is in
            play.

1810 · The ball is placed stationary on the centre mark after the "SET" signal was given.

          · The referee gives the signal "PLAY" or whistles (physical competition only). In the virtual
            competition, the time between the "SET" and "PLAY" signal is 5 seconds.

          · The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves as determined by the referee12 or 10
            seconds elapsed after the signal.

1815 Robots can take any position on the field that is consistent with the above requirements.

     For initial kick-off (to initially start or restart after a half-time interval), robots can be placed
     anywhere on the touch lines or goal lines on the respective team's own side outside of the goal, to
     autonomously enter the field from there. In the physical competition, robots must be facing the
     opposite touch line or goal line when being positioned. In case an illegal start position is chosen for
1820 a robot, it is considered illegally positioned and removed from the field. It is allowed to enter the
     field as soon as the game starts. For other kick-off situations and for dropped ball robots need to
     position themselves from the the position they were when the game was stopped.

     Robots with autonomous positioning ability are given between 15 and 45 seconds in the physical
     competition and 45 seconds in the virtual competition for re-positioning after a goal has been scored
1825 by one of the teams before the "SET" signal for kick-off is given by the referee. All human team
     members must leave the field of play immediately after the "SET" signal and before the "PLAY"
     signal.

     Game interruption procedure
     This procedure applies for throw-ins, corners, goal kicks, direct free-kicks, indirect free-kicks and
1830 penalties called during a game. It ensures a minimal distance of D between objects that were moved
     during this phase. For KidSize, D is 50 centimeters and for AdultSize, D is 1 meter.

          1. The referee blows the whistle (physical competition only), announces the offence and the game
             interruption (e.g 'Pushing Red - Direct Free-Kick Blue')

          2. The referee communicates the game interruption and to which team it is awarded to the game

1835      controller or the assistant referee operating the game controller.

          3. The robots are allowed 5 seconds to stand-up and stop any infringement to the rules. At the
             end of these 5 seconds, the referee places the ball according to the game interruption. In case
             a robot is located at a distance lower than D, the following actions are performed in order:

          (a) Move all penalized robots at a distance lower than D of the ball away, placing them ac-

1840      cording to the removal penalty rule so that they can finish serving their penalty somewhere

          else.

          (b) Apply a removal penalty on all fallen robots at a distance lower than D from the ball.

          (c) If previous steps were not sufficient to ensure distance D, the referee tries to find a nearby

          location for the ball that is at a distance of at least D from all objects. This location

1845      should respects the rule for the game interruption. In particular, there are no alternative

          location for penalties, goal kicks and corner kicks.

      12In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered clearly moving.

      66
          (d) If previous steps were not sufficient, the remaining robots at a distance of less than D
               from the ball location are moved away from the ball, ensuring that they are at least at a
               distance of D from all objects, including the ball.

1850 4. The referee communicates that the Game Interruption is ready to the GameController or the

          assistant referee operating the GameController. The player taking the game interruption has

          up to 15 seconds to position themselves for the game interruption. In the virtual competition,

          any player of the team taking the game interruption may announce that the player is ready

          to take the game interruption at any point. In the physical competition, the robot handler

1855      informs the referee if the robot is ready to take the free kick. Opponent robots must move to

          a position at least 0.75 m for KidSize and 1.5m for AdultSize away from the ball. They are

          guaranteed 15 seconds to move away from the ball.

          5. In a physical competition, the assistant referee announces that 15 seconds are over.

          6. The referee announces that the game interruption is prepared after 15 seconds have passed.

1860      The referee may also announce that the game interruption is prepared before 15 seconds have

          passed if the team taking the game interruption has announced their robot is ready and if no

          opponent is illegally positioned.

          7. Any opponent robot still illegally positioned is considered as an incapable player and must be
             removed from the field for 3010 seconds removal penalty.

1865 8. When the referee decides to execute the game interruption and all opponent robots are legally
           positioned or have been removed from the field, the referee announces that the game inter-
           ruption can be executed to the GameController or the assistant referee operating the Game-
           Controller. In case of a physical competition, the referee blows the whistle to announce the
           execution of the free kick. The team that was awarded the game interruption can kick now.

1870 9. The ball is in play after it has been kicked and clearly moves as determined by the referee13 or
           after 10 seconds.

      The distance between the ball and the player of the opponent team is measured between the
      projection on the ground of the center of mass of both objects.

     Penalty shoot-outs procedure
1875 The referee decides randomly towards which goal the penalty shoot-outs will be performed. Then,

     each penalty trial is performed with the following procedure.

          1. In the virtual competition, the striker is defined as the robot from the striker's team with the

          lowest ID without a red card. In the physical competition, the robot handler can decide which

          robot to place as a striker from the set of robots that were active on the field, penalized on

1880      the side line or in service in the end of the game time.

          2. In the virtual competition, the goalkeeper is chosen based on the GameController information.
             In the physical competition, the same procedure as for selecting a striker applies.

          3. In the virtual competition, both players are spawned at appropriate locations. In the physical
             competition, the respective robot handlers place the robots.

1885 4. The state is set to SET
       5. The ball is placed or spawned on the penalty mark.

      6. The referee waits 15 seconds before sending signals to start the trial

      13In the virtual competition, a move of at least 5 cm is considered clearly moving.

      67
       7. The state is set to PLAYING.

     The following additional rules apply to penalty shoot-outs:

1890 · The ball holding rule does not apply during penalty shoot-outs.

        · If the striker commits an offense, the trial ends immediately.

        · If the goalkeeper commits an offense, it is removed for the whole duration of the trial.

     Request for Pick-up (physical competition only)
     A robot handler may request to pick-up a robot if and only if a robot is in a dangerous situation
1895 that is likely to lead to physical injuries. If a robot handler touches a robot without the allowance of
     the referee, the respective robot receives a yellow card and the robot handler an official warning. In
     AdultSize, a request for pick-up is implicitly granted if the robot is visible unstable or about to fall.
     After two warnings for robot touching, the robot handler may not serve as a robot handler again
     for the rest of the game and needs to be replaced by a different person from the team immediately.
1900 In case of repeated violations throughout the tournament, the Technical Committee can decide to
     permanently disallow a certain person from serving as a robot handler for the rest of the tournament.

     Incapable Players
     Players not capable of play (e.g. players not walking on two legs, players not able to stand, or players
     with obvious malfunctions) are not permitted to participate in the game. They must be removed
1905 from the field. It is up to the referee to judge whether a player is capable of play. In the physical
     competition, the referee may ask the team leader of a player suspected to be incapable of play to
     demonstrate playing ability at any time. A field player that is not able to get back into a standing
     or walking posture from a fall within 20 seconds receives a 3010 seconds removal penalty. If the ball
     is within a radius of 0.5 m around the goal keeper inside the goal area, the goal keeper has to show
1910 active attempts to move the ball out of this radius by walking towards the ball or moving the ball.
     If no attempt is shown for 20 seconds, the goal keeper is considered to be an inactive player and
     receives a 3010 seconds removal penalty.
     A player that stays outside of the artificial turf for 20 seconds is considered as an incapable player
     and receives a 3010 seconds removal penalty.

1915 Damage to the Field
     A robot that damages the field, or poses a threat to spectator safety, will be removed from the field
     for a 3010 second removal penalty. It is prohibited to use cranes or gantries on field, even in the
     free time between games.

     Substitutions (physical competition only)
1920 Up to two players per game can be substituted by other players of the same team. A substituted

     robot can come back in play but it counts as an additional substitution. The referee must be
     informed prior to the substitution. A substitute only enters the field after the player being replaced
     left the field and after receiving a signal from the referee. Any of the other players may change
     places with the goalkeeper, provided that the referee is informed before the change is made and that
1925 the change is made during a stoppage of the match. Changing places/roles between a field player
     and a goalie does not count as substitution.

     Temporal Absence (physical competition only)
     Servicing robots on the playing field is not permitted. A robot may be taken out of the field for
     service, after receiving permission from the referee. Taking out a robot for service does not count
1930 as a substitution. A serviced robot may not come into play again before 3010 seconds elapsed after

      68
      it was taken out. It has to enter the field from the team's own half of the field close to the penalty
      mark facing the opposite touch line, as indicated by the referee. The same rules as for Removal
      Penalty apply.

     Manual Untangle of Robots (physical competition only)
1935 If entangled robots fail to untangle themselves, the referee might ask designated robot handlers of

     both teams to untangle the robots. Untangling must not make significant changes to robot positions
     or heading directions. Untangled robots must be laid on the ground not closer than 50cm to the
     ball and in a way not gaining an advantage.

      Removal Penalty

1940 · Time penalties of 3010 seconds for players are called by the referee. When a penalty is called
           in the physical competition, the designated robot handler has to remove the robot as soon as
           possible and by that interacting as little as possible with the game

          · In the physical competition, the referee and assistant referees are in charge of timing the

          penalties and notifying the teams to put back their robots to play. In the virtual competition, the

1945      robots receive the signal that their penalty time is over automatically from the GameController.

          · A field player or goal keeper suffering a time penalty will be removed from the field and is only

          allowed to re-enter the field from the team's own half of the field close to the penalty mark as

          indicated by the referee. In the physical competition, robots need to face the opposite touch

          line. The referee chooses the touch line further away from the ball if there is still an empty spot

1950      available. The first spot for a penalized robot on the touch line is on the same height of the

          penalty mark. Every consecutive spot is 60 cm (KidSize) or 100 cm (AdultSize) away from the

          previous position, either towards the team's own goal line or towards the center line. A valid

          position must be at least 30 cm (KidSize) or 50 cm (AdultSize) away from the goal line and

          center line. A position is considered as being taken if a robot from any team is within a radius

1955      of 30 cm (KidSize) or 50 cm (AdultSize) of the penalty position. The referee always positions

          the robot on the penalty spot closest to the penalty mark. If two positions are available that

          are equally close, the referee chooses the position that is further away from the ball. In the

          virtual competition, robots get placed automatically by the autonomous referee. When placed,

          the robot joints are reset to their initial position and their velocities is set to 0.

1960 · In the physical competition, after the robot has been placed at the position indicated by the

          referee and with both feet entirely outside the field of play the robot handler announces to

          the assistant referee that the robot is ready to get back in. The 3010 seconds penalty start

          counting from the point of announcement. From this point onwards the robot handler may

          not touch or interfere with the robot in any other way (including button presses). If any part

1965      of the robot touches the field of play (including touch lines) or the robot handler touching

          the robot before the 3010 seconds expired, the time is reset. In the virtual competition, the

          penalty time starts counting immediately after the robot was repositioned to the side line by

          the autonomous referee.

          · The GameController or the assistant referee operating it will:

1970      ­ Penalize the robot as soon as the referee calls the penalty.

          ­ Marks the penalty time counting down as soon as the robot handler announced the robot
            being ready to walk in (physical competition) or it is placed on the penalty position outside
            the field (virtual competition)

          ­ In the physical competition, the assistant referee resets the penalty time whenever the

1975      robot handler touches the robot or the robot touches the field of play

      69
        · The penalty is automatically removed after 3010 seconds of penalty have expired.

     Timeouts (physical competition only)
     A team may call for a timeout before kick-off after a goal was scored, the start of a new half, or
     a drop ball was called and before a penalty shoot-out. During a timeout robots may be serviced.
1980 Each team may take at most one timeout per period during regular game time and one additional
     timeout during all of the extended time and penalty shoot-out. If a team is not ready to resume
     the game when the referee wants to start the game, it has to take a timeout. If there is no timeout
     left, the referee will start the game anyway. A timeout ends automatically after 120 s. A timeout
     also ends when the team signals its end to the referee.

1985 Referee Timeouts (physical competition only)
     The head referee may call a timeout before kick-off after a goal was scored, the start of a new half,
     or a drop ball was called and before a penalty shoot-out if they deem it necessary. A referee timeout
     should only be called in dire circumstances - one example might be when the power to the wireless
     router is down. However, when and whether to call a referee timeout is left up to the head referee.

1990 Referees may call multiple timeouts during a game if needed. Teams may do anything during these
     timeouts, but they must be ready to play 2 minutes after the referee begins a timeout. The referee
     should end the timeout once they believe the circumstance for which the timeout was called has been
     resolved. In cases where the circumstance for which the timeout was called is not resolved within
     10 minutes, the Technical Committee should be consulted regarding when/if play should continue.

1995 The team who would have kicked off if the timeout had not been called shall kickoff when the game
     resumes.

     Timeout and Restart by Technical Committee (virtual competition only)
     Two members of the Technical Committee that are not directly involved with any of the team
     currently playing the game can decide to pause or restart the simulation in case of severe technical
2000 difficulties with the simulator, the network, the computer instances or any other equipment involved
     in running the simulated games. A timeout can be taken multiple times throughout a game if
     necessary. The Technical Committee must publish a written report of the amount and reasons for
     any timeout taken or restart of the game.

     Disciplinary sanctions against robots
2005 Yellow and red cards given to robots only accumulate for the current game and are cleared again

     after the end of each game. Warnings against robot handlers and/or teams have to be reported
     to the Technical Committee after each game. They are recorded and accumulated for the whole
     tournament.

     Disciplinary sanctions against teams (virtual competition only)
2010 A team is cautioned by the technical committee and may be shown a yellow card if it commits any

     of the following offences:

        · unsporting behaviour, in particular by deliberately and repeatedly using limitations of the au-
           tomated referee to their advantage

        · dissent by word or action

2015 · persistent infringement of the Laws of the Game

        · delaying the restart of play

      70
     Result publication (virtual competition only)
     In case the simulation can be performed and rendered in real time, a video of the simulated game
     will be streamed simultaneously to the match being played. In case the simulator does not allow for
2020 real-time games and rendering, the video will be streamed after the match was performed and the
     rendering was completed. Teams will get access to log files of the game and their robot software
     immediately after the video of the match has ended.

     Software changes (virtual competition only)
     Teams can update their software during the tournament. The software they intend to use for the
2025 next round of games needs to be submitted at latest X hours before the video stream of their next
     game is scheduled, the value of X is provided to teams at the beginning of the tournament and it
     can be different for round-robin games and knock-out games.

     Drop-In Games (physical competition only)

2030

     Organisation
     Each participating team will contribute one drop-in player for each drop-in game. The drop-in player
     may be chosen from all available robots of the team and does not have to be the same in all drop-in
     games. Each drop-in player will compete in games with many different teams composed of randomly
2035 chosen drop-in players. In each game, the opponent will be a similarly composed team of randomly
     selected drop-in players. The exact number of games played by each drop-in player depends on the
     number of teams that participate in the competition. A minimum of 4 drop-in games will be played
     by every team.

     The drop-in players will be allocated to teams randomly at least 24 hours before the first game takes
2040 place. The allocation to teams for the individual games is randomly chosen and changes for every

     single game. Some teams might play one more Drop-In game than others.

      Rules
      All normal game rules apply to this competition. The only exceptions are:

          1. The games are played with 5 players in a KidSize team and 3 players in an AdultSize team.

2045      If there is an insufficient number of participants, games may be played 4 vs. 4 or 3 vs. 3 for

          KidSize or 2 vs. 2 for AdultSize.

          2. Games may end in a draw.

          3. Each of the players has a jersey number from the set 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, resp. 1, 2, 3.

          4. Drop-in teams will wear the blue and red team colours.

2050 5. In AdultSize, one robot handler per competing robot is allowed. In KidSize, the teams have to
           agree on one robot handler per team.

      Removal of incapable players has to be enforced strictly.

     Communication
     Teams are strongly encouraged to implement the mitecom team communication protocol which is
2055 available at
     https://github.com/RoboCup-Humanoid-TC/mitecom or the Protobuf-based communication
     protocol which can be found at https://github.com/RoboCup-Humanoid-TC/RobocupProtocol

      Selection of the Referees

      71
     Referees will be drawn from the remaining participating teams, or if needed, due to a low number
2060 of teams, the TC and OC will provide referees. Referees for a match may be picked among the pool

     of available referees from any size class.

     Scoring
     When a goal is scored, all players of the scoring team on the field receive 1 point and the player who
     scored the goal receives an additional 1 point if it was not an own goal. A robot is considered to be
2065 on the field if both feet of the robot are fully inside the field area. The player who scored the goal
     receives the points regardless of its position on the field. Incapable players, penalized players, players
     outside the field or players having been removed for any other reason, e.g. service, will receive no
     point. When a goal is suffered, all players of the team suffering the goal receive -1 points, but all
     players which were not on the field, including incapable players, penalized players or players having
2070 been removed for any other reason, e.g. in service, receive -2 points. If during a throw-in procedure,
     the thrower uses his hands for entering the ball and as a result the thrower's team scores a goal,
     the thrower is awarded 1 additional point. This additional point is only awarded if the goal is scored
     before the next game interruption. Points from all games are summed up. For players who played
     one or more games more than the others, only the points of those games with the higher scores are
2075 considered.
     Drop-in players are initially ranked according to the arithmetic mean. If there are ties, the tied
     players are ranked according to the number of games played, the maximum points awarded in a
     single game and the number of goals scored (in this order). The three most highly ranked players
     of a sub-league receive a 'Best Player' certificate.
2080 If the three best drop-in players can not be identified with the scheme provided above, an additional
     game with players drawn group wise (from the groups of equally high ranked players with a total
     number of points greater than zero) from the highest-ranked players is to be played.
     If there are still ties a penalty shoot out among the equally high ranked drop-in players with a total
     number of points greater than zero takes place.

2085 Example
     There are 20 participating players for 4 KidSize Drop-In teams (A, B, C, D). Games shall be A-B,
     A-C, A-D, B-C, B-D, C-D. For the first game (A-B), Player 1 is randomly drawn for Team B and
     plays the game with the other team members. For the second game (A-C), player 1 is not drawn.
     For the third game (A-D), player 1 is drawn for team A and plays the game. For the fourth game

2090 (B-C), player 1 is drawn to team C and plays the game. Now player 1 will be removed from the
     drawing, because the number of 3 games was reached. If there would be only 19 participants, player
     1 may be drawn for the final game.
     Assuming teams with player 1 to score a single goal in every game (with player 1 on the field), then
     player 1 will have a score of 3 and an arithmetic average of 1.

2095 Technical Challenges (physical competition only)

     The technical challenges consist of:

       1. Push Recovery (AdultSize)

2100 2. Collaborative Localization (KidSize)

       3. Goal Kick from Moving Ball (KidSize and AdultSize)

       4. Parkour (KidSize and AdultSize)

       5. High-Kick (KidSize and AdultSize)

      72
       6. Obstacle Navigation
2105 7. Long Stride

     For details on the technical challenges, please refer to Section III of this document.

      73
     Best Humanoid Award (physical competition only)

2110 The teams of the Kid and Adult size classes that have participated in the drop-in competition are
     ranked in separate lists to determine the overall best humanoid.
     The ranking is based on the aggregated number of points earned in the individual competitions.

     The points earned in the technical challenge are used directly.

     For the software challenge the winner receives 30 points. The second best team receives 21 points.
2115 The third best team receives 15 points.

     For the Drop-In challenge the winner receives 30 points. The second best team receives 21 points.
     The third best team receives 15 points.

     For the soccer games the winner receives 60 points. The second best team receives 42 points. The
     third best team receives 30 points.

2120 The teams ranked first in the KidSize and AdultSize lists are candidates for the best humanoid.
     The final ranking between the three candidates is determined by the points earned in the individual
     competitions as stated above. The best KidSize or AdultSize team with the most overall points wins
     the best humanoid award. If there are ties, the average goals scored per game is used to determine
     the ranking of the three eligible candidates. If there are still ties, the president of the RoboCup

2125 Federation breaks the tie.

     Trophies

     A trophy is awarded to the winner, second and third place of the soccer tournament in each of the
2130 individual size classes (physical competition only). The winner of the consolation bracket might be

     awarded a certificate. In case there are two divisions, trophies are only awarded to the teams of
     division A. Teams of Division B might be awarded certificates.

     A trophy is awarded to the teams second and third in the KidSize 4-4 soccer game and the AdultSize
     2-2 soccer game. In case of less than 9 teams participating in a size class the team ranked third
2135 will be awarded a certificate instead of a trophy. In case of less than 6 teams participating in a size
     class the team ranked second will also be awarded a certificate instead of a trophy.

     In a physical competition, the Best Humanoid Award is awarded to the team ranked first in the Best
     Humanoid list, it can either be a trophy or a certificate.

     In a physical competition, a trophy is awarded to the team ranked first on the technical challenges
2140 and certificates are awarded to the teams second and third in the technical challenges. In case

     less than 15 teams participate to a size class, the team ranked first at technical challenges will be
     awarded a certificate instead of a trophy. A certificate is awarded to the team that performed best
     in the software challenge. A certificate is awarded to the team ranked second in the Best Humanoid
     list. A 'Best Player' certificate is awarded to the three most highly ranked Drop-in players. In case
2145 20 teams or more participate to a class size, the team ranked first on Drop-in is awarded a trophy
     instead of a certificate. A team can only receive a 'Best Player' certificate if their total amount of
     points is greater than 0.

     The number of trophies awarded depend on the number of teams participating to a class size and
     is summarized in Table 3.

      74
Number of teams Regular soccer games Technical challenges Drop-in games

1 to 5                    1st

6 to 8                    1st, 2nd

9 to 14                   1st, 2nd, 3rd

15 to 19                  1st, 2nd, 3rd  1st

20                        1st, 2nd, 3rd  1st  1st

Table 3: Trophies awarded depending on the number of teams participating in a class size.

2150 Conflict Resolution

     It is the responsibility of the team leader to inspect the other team's robots an hour (physical
     competition) or twelve hours (virtual competition) in advance of a game. Any concern regarding the
2155 rule compliance of any of the robots, including the amount, size and colour of the team markers,
     must be brought to the attention of the referee during a physical competition or the Technical
     Committee during a virtual competition. If the referee is unavailable during a physical competition,
     they have to be brought to the attention of the Technical Committee instead.

     Every result of a game needs to be certified by at least two members of the Technical Committee
2160 not directly involved in any of the teams playing in that game. Doubts concerning a serious violation

     of any rule during a specific game must be brought up to a member of the Technical Committee and
     investigated before signing the result. By signing the result sheet, a team agrees that the result came
     off in a fair game. Concerns must be brought to the attention of the Technical Committee within
     half an hour of the completion of the video stream (virtual competition) or game play (physical
2165 competition). If a team brings up an official concern to the Technical Committee, a meeting of the
     Technical Committee must be called as soon as possible. If the team of a member of the Technical
     Committee is directly involved in the game in question, the respective member is excluded from
     the meeting. At least three members of the Technical Committee need to be part of the meeting
     and the decision process. If less than three members of the Technical Committee are available,
2170 members of the Organizing committee or, if necessary, Trustees or members of committees from
     other leagues have to be called into the meeting. Members of these meetings may request to
     inspect the hardware, robot model and software of any team involved in the issue. In a virtual
     tournament, they will receive access to the rendered video of the simulation and any log file produced
     by the simulator, GameController and automated referee. If serious violations of rules or recurrent
2175 unsportive behavior are detected, the committee may, among others, decide to invalidate the result
     of the game in question or take disciplinary actions against a team as defined in Law 5, depending on
     the severity of the rule violation. The decision of the committee meeting need to be announced to
     the whole league. If teams receive a warning or yellow card for unsportive behavior and are requested
     to make changes to their code for the next game, they need to receive a period of at least four
2180 hours to make the requested change. If their next game was scheduled earlier than this, the game
     needs to be postponed.

     Announcement of code and hardware usage

2185 Teams are required to clearly state during the qualification process:

        · in their software description part of the application material, they need to state what part of
           the code is based on another team's code base. This needs to be declared for each software

      75
          section individually. If the code of a team builds on another team's code, they need to clearly

          state their own changes and contributions. Failure to acknowledge the usage of another teams

2190      software can lead to disqualifications (if major parts are built on other team's software without

          announcing this) or can lower the score of future submissions to the Humanoid League.

          · Clearly state in their robot description whether their robots or major components are bought or

          used from another team or a company (this includes rebuilding robots based on open hardware

          models of other RoboCup teams). Again, modifications and a team's own contributions need

2195      to be clearly marked.

      In case they decide to use software or hardware by another team after the qualification material has
      already been approved a team needs to write an e-mail to the Humanoid League mailing list.

      Acknowledgements

2200

     These rules evolved from previous versions of the RoboCup Humanoid League rules. We would like to
     thank Henry Yen for the conversion of the rules into a basic LaTeX version in 2010. The 2008 version
     of the rules was compiled by Pasan Kulvanit and Oskar von Stryk, the 2007 version of the rules by
     Emanuele Menegatti and the 2006 version by Sven Behnke, who did a remarkable job improving the
2205 rule document and gearing it towards the FIFA Laws of the Game. The improvements of the 2005
     version were compiled by Norbert Michael Mayer. Philipp Allgeuer significantly contributed to the
     conversion of the 2017 rule book to LaTeX. Other input came earlier from the rules of the RoboCup
     MiddleSize and Four-Legged Leagues.
     The rules were continuously discussed within the technical committee of the humanoid league and
2210 also on the humanoid league forum. The following members of the technical committee for 2023
     were responsible for crating the first version of the rules for the virtual Humanoid RoboCup league:
     Reinaldo Bianchi, Reinhard Gerndt, Jasper Güldenstein, Maike Paetzel-Prüsmann, Alessandra Rossi
     and Sebastian Stelter. Special thanks go to Martin Friedmann, Sebastian Mielke and Timon Giese
     for the contribution of several figures and to Philipp Allgeuer for his contributions to the 2019
2215 version of the rules. We thank the authors of the original design and schematics of the center of
     mass measurement device described in the appendix.

      76
          Section III

          Rules for RoboCup Humanoid League

          Technical Challenges (physical

2220      competition only)

      77
     General Rules for Technical Challenges

     The technical challenges consist of the following individual challenges:

        · Part A: Push Recovery (AdultSize)

        · Part B: Collaborative Localization (KidSize)

2225 · Part C: Dynamic Kick from Moving Ball

        · Part D: Parkour

        · Part E: High Kick

        · Part F: Obstacle Navigation

        · Part G: Long Stride

2230 Only the robots that passed the robot inspection are allowed to participate in the technical challenges.
     At any point, two robots are considered active during the technical challenges. One player can be
     substituted by another player of the same team. No hardware modifications of the robots are allowed
     for the Technical Challenge (i.e., a robot cannot be modified from the configuration it had in the
     soccer games).

2235 The team scheduled for the Technical Challenge must have access to the field five minutes prior to
     the scheduled starting time. The referee will give the start signal at the scheduled time.

     Any technical challenge that involves more than one robot may be completed by two separate teams
     cooperating.

     Method of scoring

2240

     The Technical Challenge consists of four parts: B, C, D and E for KidSize and A, C, D and E for
     AdultSize.seven parts: A, B, C, D, E, F, G. Each of the parts can be attempted multiple times, in
     any order. The team might terminate a trial at any time, in order to reattempt the same part or
2245 switch to another part of the challenge. A trial terminates automatically when 25 minutes elapsed
     after the referee gave the start signal. This concludes the Technical Challenge for the team. The
     time is taken for each of the trials, if completed successfully. Ranking in the individual challenges
     is determined according to the rules defined for each individual challenge.If two teams complete a
     technical challenge in cooperation, both teams receive the same score. For each part, the highest
2250 ranked fully successful team receives 10 points. The second fully successful team receives 7 points.
     The third fully successful team receives 5 points. All other teams who were fully successful in this
     part of the challenge receive 3 points. In case a team with only partial success has been ranked
     first, second or third in a challenge, they receive 5, 3 or 2 points respectively. Teams with only a
     partial success ranked fourth or lower do not receive any points. If two teams complete a technical
2255 challenge in cooperation and receive points for that challenge, they are awarded 1 additional point.

     Robot Handlers During the Technical Challenge

     During an ongoing trial of a technical challenge the robot handler is not allowed to interact with the
2260 robot's sensors in any way. In the moment the handler either touches the robot or interacts with

     the robot in any way, the trial is finished and counted as unsuccessful.

      78
   · In KidSize robot handlers are not allowed to enter the field vicinity of the robot during a trial,
      unless the referee asks them to remove a robot.

   · In AdultSize one robot handler is permitted to stay on the field near the robot during a trial.

79
2265 Part A: Push Recovery (AdultSize only)

     The goal of the push recovery challenge is to withstand a strong push while walking.
     Cushioned plastic bottles partially filled with sand (or similar) will be suspended on a rope of fixed
     length, and swung into the robot as a pendulum to apply the push. Bottles of mass 1 kg, 2 kg, 3 kg,
     5 kg and 10 kg will be available, where the default mass to use will be 3 kg in AdultSize and 1 kg in
2270 KidSize. If a robot completes a fully successful trial with the default mass for its size class, then a
     larger bottle may be used in further trials.

     The length of the rope L (between 1.5 and 2 meters, measured from the point of attachment to
     the centre of mass of the bottle) will remain fixed for all trials of a particular size class. The rope is
     attached to a frame of adjustable height, which is used to adjust the centre of mass of the bottle at
2275 the moment of impact to be as close as possible to the height of the centre of mass of the robot.
     Where this is not possible, the centre of mass of the bottle should strike a solid part of the centre
     of the hips of the robot. For this and other purposes, the centre of mass of the bottle should be
     clearly marked.

     Each trial consists of three pushes--a push from the front, a push from the back, and a push from
2280 either the front or the back, in any order. To apply a push, the bottle is released from a particular

     position, and allowed to swing into the robot in such a way that the impact occurs when the rope
     is vertical. The amount of retraction of the bottle is measured by the ground projected distance
     D from the centre of mass of the bottle, to the attachment point of the rope. Before each trial
     (set of three pushes), the team must declare what value of D should be used (limited to 0.75L for
2285 practical implementation concerns). A push is successfully absorbed if after receiving the push the
     robot returns to a stable walking cycle, as perceived by the referee. The robot must be walking in
     place (with a normal step frequency) both before the push, and after it has stabilised itself again.

     For a complete trial to be fully successful, the robot needs to successfully absorb all three pushes.
     For a trial to be partially successful, the robot needs to successfully absorb two of the three pushes.
2290 The robots are ranked by the following metric (higher is better):

                                                            
                                                     M = H · mB · hi

                                                              hc mR hc

where we have the following:                                                            
   M Ranking metric           H Vertical height fallen by the bottle = L - L2 - D2

    mB Mass of the bottle     hi Height of the centre of mass of the bottle at impact
    mR Mass of the robot      hc Height of the centre of mass of the robot

80
                                         Figure 5: Setup for the push recovery challenge.
81
      Part B: Collaborative Localization (KidSize only)

     The goal of the collaborative localization challenge is to have a robot without a working vision
2295 system (RK) to kick a ball into the goal with the help of another robot (RH), which is able to see

     the ball and guide RK in this task. Results of the technical challenge are based on a batch of three
     runs.

      Run Setup
      The initial setup of a run is as follows:

2300 1. The vision-less robot RK is placed inside the centre circle by the team taking the technical
           challenge.

          2. The helper robot RH is placed anywhere inside the field by the team taking the technical
             challenge.

          3. The ball is placed roughly on the segment parallel to the goal line passing through the penalty

2305      mark, between the two goal posts, by the referee, after the two robots were positioned (Fig.

          6).

          4. The referee blows the whistle to start the run.

          5. Teams may start the robots manually by pressing a button when the run starts. But robots
             must not be touched after the referee blew the whistle.

2310 6. A chronometer is started when the referee blows the whistle.

      Run evaluation

      The chronometer is stopped when the run ends. The causes for the end of a run and the possible
      results are as following:

          · Failure

2315      ­ The ball has not been touched by RK after 2 minute.

          ­ The ball is touched by the helper robot RH, at any moment.

          · Partial success

          ­ The ball was kicked by RK but leaves the field without scoring a goal.

          ­ The ball was kicked by RK, stopped rolling inside of the field, and has not been touched

2320           again by RK after 2 minute.

          · Success

          ­ The ball was kicked by RK and a goal was scored.

     Trials and ranking

     A trial consists of three different runs.
2325 During a run both robots RK and RH can move, but if the ball is touched by RH the run ends in

     Failure.
     A trial is considered as successful if at least 2 runs from the batch resulted in Success. A trial is
     considered as partially successful if at least 2 runs resulted in Success or Partial success.
     The teams are ranked according to the following criteria on their best batch:

2330 1. Number of Success.

          2. Number of Partial success.

          3. Average time for Success runs.

          4. Average shortest distance of the ball to the goal line for Partial success runs.

      82
                        Figure 6: Ball initial location for the collaborative localization challenge.
83
     Part C: Goal-Dynamic-Kick from Moving Ball

2335 The goal of the goal-dynamic-kick from a moving ball challenge is to kick a moving ball into the
     goal. Results of the technical challenge are based on a batch of three runs.

     Run Setup

                     Figure 7: Setup for the moving ball challenge.

      The initial setup of a run is presented in Fig. 7, procedure is as follows:

          1. The ball is placed on one corner of the field as chosen by the team taking the technical challenge.

2340 2. The robot RK is placed on the penalty mark.

       3. The pass of the ball may either be performed by a human member from the team H or another
           robot, RP . If the pass is performed by a robot, the team may place RP after the referee has
           placed the ball. Rp can be placed anywhere on the field, at least 1m away from the ball.

       4. The referee blows the whistle to start the run.

2345 5. Teams may start the robot RP manually by pressing a button when the run starts. But RK
           must not be touched after the referee blew the whistle. If the pass is performed by a human,
           then the human is not allowed to wait before kicking. Once the whistle is blown the human as
           2 seconds to kick the ball, otherwise the run is retaken.

          6. A chronometer is started when RP or H kicks the ball.

2350 Run evaluation

     The chronometer is stopped when the run ends. The causes for the end of a run and the possible
     results are as following:

          · Failure

          ­ The ball has been touched twice by RP , H or RK.

2355      ­ Rk executed the kick motion but failed to kick the ball.

          ­ The ball was kicked by Rk but leaves the field without scoring a goal.

          · Retake

          ­ The ball stops rolling or leaves the field before Rk attempted to kick.

      84
          ­ The ball bounces on Rk rather than being kicked by Rk and Rk did not try to execute the

2360      kick motion before.

          ­ The pass is performed by a human and the human did not kick 2 seconds after the whistle
            was blown.

          · Partial success

          ­ Ball was kicked by Rk but stopped rolling inside of the field.

2365      · Success

          ­ Ball was kicked by Rk and a goal was scored.

     Trials and ranking
     A trial consists of three different runs, each run ending with a Retake is restarted and do not count.
     A trial is considered as successful if at least 2 runs from the batch resulted in Success. A trial is
2370 considered as partially successful if at least 2 runs resulted in Success or Partial success.
     The teams are ranked according to the following criteria on their best batch:

          1. Number of Success where the pass of the ball was executed by a robot

          2. Number of Success where the pass of the ball was executed by a human

          3. Number of Partial success where the pass of the ball was executed by a robot

2375 4. Number of Partial success where the pass of the ball was executed by a human

          5. Average time for Success runs, from first touch by Rp or H until goal is scored

          6. Average shortest distance to the goal line for Partial success runs

      85
      Part D: Parkour

     The goal of the Parkour TC is to have a robot going up one platform, staying on top of it, and
2380 going down without falling on the ground.

     The minimum height must be at least 1/5th of the robot height and must be a multiple of 5 cm.
     The robot can touch the platform with its limbs (arms and legs)legs, but no other part of the robot
     is allowed to touch it.
     The platform will have an area of approximately 60 × 60 cm.

2385 Run Setup
     The initial setup of a run is as follows:

       1. The robot is placed in front of the platform as high as chosen by the team taking the technical
           challenge.

       2. The referee blows the whistle to start the run.

2390 3. Teams may start the robot manually by pressing a button when the run starts. But the robot
           must not be touched after the referee blew the whistle.

       4. A chronometer is started when the referee blows the whistle.

     Run evaluation

     The chronometer is stopped when the run ends. The causes for the end of a run and the possible
2395 results are as following:

          · Failure

          ­ The robot is not able to go up the platform.

          ­ The robot falls without going up the platform.

          ­ The robot touches the platform with a part of the body that is not a limbleg.

2400      ­ The robot is touched by a human after the whistle is blown.

          · Partial success

          ­ The robot is able to go up the platform, with both the feet touching thread (the top of
            the platform), but falls before being able to go down.

          ­ The robot is able to go up the platform, with both the feet touching thread (the top of the

2405      platform), and, to prevent the robot from falling, a human handler touches the robot at

          this moment.The robot steps up and steps down the platform, without falling, and stays

          up, without moving, for 5 seconds.

          · Success

          ­ The robot steps up and jumps down the platform, without falling, and stays up, without

2410      moving, for 5 seconds. The motion is considered a jump, if both feet are in the air at the

          same time.

     Trials and ranking

     Teams are ranked based on their best 2 consecutive results.
     A trial is considered as successful if at least 2 runs in a row resulted in Success. A trial is considered
2415 as partially successful if at least 2 runs in a row resulted in Success or Partial success.
     The teams are ranked according to the following criteria on their best batch:

      86
          1. The maximum height the robot successfully managed to achieve on a Successful trial divided
             by the height of the robot.

          2. The maximum height the robot managed to achieve on a Partially Successful trial divided by

2420      the height of the robot.

          3. Average time of a Successful trial.

          4. Average time of a Partially Successful trial.

      87
     Part E: High-Kick Challenge
     The goal of the high-kick challenge is to kick the ball in the goal at maximum height. At each
2425 attempt, the team announces the minimum height their robot tries to achieve. The minimum
     height must be at least 2/3rd of the ball's diameter and must be a multiple of 1cm.
     The ball is then placed on the penalty mark and the team may position the robot freely but at least
     30cm away from the ball. After the start signal, the robot may move the ball to any position before
     attempting a kick from the ground. Only kicks count that score a goal of at least the minimum
2430 height. The trial ends unsuccessfully when the ball leaves the field, or when the robot touches the
     goal obstacle or the ball touches the front of the goal obstacle.
     The robots are ranked by the maximum height they successfully managed to kick the ball into the
     goal.

      88
      Part F: Obstacle Navigation Challenge

                                           Figure 8: Setup for the Obstacle Navigation Challenge

2435 The goal of the Obstacle Navigation Challenge is demonstrate robots' ability to avoid collision with
     obstacles.

      Setup

      Figure 8 shows the setup of the challenge.

      A section of the field (marked dashed in yellow) is partitioned of using white tape.

2440 The width of the field strip X is 1.5m for KidSize and 3m for AdultSize. The length of the field

      strip B is defined by the field sizes of KidSize and AdultSize.

      Five obstacles are placed on the field. The obstacles are blue or red as specified by the team colors.

      Their height is 0.4m for KidSize and 1m for AdultSize. Their width is 0.4m for KidSize and 0.6m

      for AdultSize.

2445  Nine   locations    are  possible  for  obstacle    placement  at   increments    of  1    X  and  B  respectively.  Not
                                                                                            4
                                                                                                         1
      more   than    two  obstacles  shall  be  placed    next  to  each  other  (i.e.  at  the  same    4  increment  of  B)  to

      allow the robot to pass. The placement and color of obstacles shall be randomized for each attempt

      using for example the roll of a dice and/or a coin flip. The placement of the outer obstacles (i.e.

      1   X  and  3  X)   shall  be  adjusted   so  that  the   distance  between  the      obstacles  and  the  white  tape   is
      4           4
2450 smaller than the width of the robot.

      Execution

      89
       1. The robot is placed on the side line of the field (marked as A in Figure 8) in the middle of the
           field strip.

       2. Teams may start the robot manually by pressing a button.

2455 3. A chronometer is started when the robot starts moving (including head movements).

       4. The run stops when the robot fully exits the field strip or reaches the opposite side. The team
           may abort the run.

       5. The chronometer is stopped when the robot touches the sideline on the opposite side of the
           field.

2460 Evaluation

          · Failure

          ­ The robot fully exits the field strip
          ­ The robot knocks over an obstacle

          · Partial success

2465      ­ The robot partially exits the field strip or touches an obstacle but touches the sideline on

          the opposite side of the field.

          · Success

          ­ The robot touches the sideline on the opposite side of the field and does not touch any
            obstacles and does not partially or fully exit the field strip.

2470 Ranking
     Teams are ranked on their best run according to the following criteria:

       1. Duration of a Successful run

       2. Duration of a Partially Successful run

      90
     Part G: Long Stride Challenge
2475 In this challenge the robot must "step over" a measured distance on the ground.

     Setup
     A length of string is placed on the ground at a known distance from the center line of the field.

     Execution
       1. The robot is placed on the other side of the ceneter line, facing the string.

2480 2. The robot steps over the region from the center line to the far side of the string.

      Evaluation

          · Failure

          ­ The robot steps within the area between the string and the center line.

          · Partial success

2485      ­ The robot steps over the distance but touches the string or the center line.

          · Success

          ­ The robot steps with both feet over the string without touching either the string or the
            center line.

     Ranking
2490 The distance between the string and the center line is measured and divided by the length of the

     robot's leg to give a normalized score. Teams are ranked on their best run according to the following
     criteria:

       1. The distance of a Successful run

       2. The distance of a Partially Successful run

      91
2495 Part H: Software Challenge
     In addition to the technical challenges, a software challenge is conducted to allow teams to present
     their recent research.
     Participating teams have to create a poster (A3 or A2), and prepare a short 5 minutes oral pre-
     sentation which additionally explains and shows the idea and results of this approach. If there is a

2500 monitor on site, it can be used for the presentation. However, this depends on the location and the
     teams should be prepared to give their presentation only with their poster if necessary.
     Teams are encouraged to publish the code for their approach to enable a fast progress in the league.
     However, only the top 3 ranked teams are required to publish their code with instructions within
     one month after the competition.

2505 Scoring
     The winner will be decided by a vote among the team leaders using the Condorcet method14.
     Each participating team will vote for their top teams in order (excluding themselves). Teams are
     encouraged to evaluate the presentations based on the following criteria:
        · Novelty

2510 · Benefit to the league
        · Documentation
        · Ease of transfer to other teams

     At a time decided by the designated referee, within one hour of the last demonstration if not
     otherwise specified, the captain of each team will submit the team's rankings by filling out a form.
2515 Any points awarded by a team to itself will be disregarded. The points awarded by the teams will be
     summed and thus form the score of this challenge which is then converted according to the formula
     described in the beginning of this section.

          14https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Condorcet_method

      92
     Part I: SPL/HL Collaborative Challenge
     Teamwork is a crucial aspect of soccer, and passing the ball between teammates is a fundamental
2520 component of successful collaboration. This challenge is designed to encourage teams to develop ef-
     fective offensive passing strategies while fostering cooperation between robots from different leagues.
     In each session, teams will collaborate with a different team. The total number of sessions will be
     finalized closer to the competition.
     The challenge involves two robots from the Standard Platform League (SPL) and two robots from
2525 the Humanoid League (HL). One robot from each league will form a cooperative team, while the
     other two robots will act as static obstacles. Each obstacle robot will face the attacking robot from
     the opposite league.
     The objective for the attacking robots is to complete as many successful passes as possible within
     a five-minute period. To promote collaboration, the challenge aims to maximize the number of
2530 attempts, enabling teams to cooperate with as many participating teams from the other league as
     possible. However, the exact number of attempts will be determined closer to the competition,
     based on the available schedule and time constraints.

      Figure 9: Setup using the standard SPL field. The red zones are for attacking robots, and the blue zone for
      defending robots.

     Setup
     This challenge will be conducted on a standard SPL field. The challenge requires three virtual
2535 zones shown in Figure 9. The red zones represent area available to attacker robots. The blue zone
     represents the area where the defender robots are placed. The three zones should be made clearly
     visible to observers including the referee, by demarcating them on the field through the use of a
     green tape. The tape must not break the regular white field lines. Robots must localize using the

      93
     regular filed lines. The ball used must be from the Humanoid league, featuring a dark-and-white
2540 patterned design.

     Network Communication
     The two attacking robots must be connected to the GameController. Direct network-based com-
     munication between the robots is prohibited. However, other forms of natural communication, such
     as visual signal or sound is allowed.

2545 Robot Positioning
     The defending robots must be turned on and stay in a standing position facing the attacking from
     the other league. They must remain in the same static position toward the attempt. The starting
     robot's positions are identified by the points A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I in Figures 9. The robot's
     positions are:

2550 Standard SPL field the reference frame of each point is put in the lower left corner of the corre-
     sponding area.
     A = G = (0.6m, 1.8m)
     B = H = (1.2m, 1.2m)
     C = I = (1.8m, 0.6m)

2555 D = (0.6, 0.55m)
     E = (1.2m, 0.55m)
     F = (1.8m, 0.55m)

2560 One attacking robots is randomly placed in A, B, or C, and the other attacking robot randomly
     at G, H, or I. One attacking robot is randomly selected to start with the ball. The defenders are
     positioned randomly D, E, or F. See Figure 9. In case of fallen robots, if the robot is not able to
     get up by itself, the team can request a fallen robot from the GameController. This will obviously
     result in a penalization for the robot and a possible time loss for the team.

2565 Execution
     For each attempt the attacking robots must be connected to GameController. Before each attempt,
     GameController is set to Initial. After the robots are positioned, the GameController changes to
     Ready state and then Set. The attempt commences using the referee whistle and GameController
     process, as in typical SPL games.

2570 The attacking robots pass the ball back-and-forth as often as possible until the attempt ends. The
     attacking robots must remain within their red zones throughout the attempt. A robot is considered
     inside its red zone if any part of the robot remains within the virtual plane of the zone.
     If the ball leaves the red zones and comes to a full stop, the cooperative teams get one possibility
     of resetting the ball. The ball must be placed approximately 30 cm in front of the last attacking

2575 robot that touched the ball.
     An attempt ends when:

       1. The timeout is reached,

       2. The defenders touch the ball,

       3. One attacking player leave its red zone.

2580 Each team may make three attempts at the challenge however, they cannot modify their code
     between the attempts.
     A successful pass is defined as meeting all the following criteria:

       1. The ball has been touched by two attacking robots.

      94
       2. The ball moved more than one meter from its starting position.
2585 3. The ball crosses the blue zone so that is starts and ends in different red zones.

       4. The ball stops moving in a red zone.
     Scoring
     One point is awarded for each successful pass as defined above. The referee will count and adjudicate
     successful passes. The score for an attempt is the total number of successful passes.
2590 Teams are ranked overall based on their score, from the highest to the lowest.

      95
                      Appendix
               Additional Material

96
     Center of mass measurement

     This sections presents the official procedure to measure HCOM , the height of the center of mass of
2595 the robot used in Law 4. It also provides instructions on how to build the measuring device used in

     the procedure.

     Construction of the measuring device

2600 The dimensions of the device are different for KidSize and AdultSize. In this section, Hmax denotes
     the maximum height allowed for the according league (see Law 4). W denotes the width of the
     measuring device (60cm for KidSize, 115cm for AdultSize).

     The required materials are:
        · 1 measuring tape of length Hmax

2605 · An aluminium plate (Hmax + 5cm by W - 6cm)
        · A wooden board - Plywood with:
              ­ Length: Hmax + 20cm for KidSize, Hmax + 40cm for AdultSize
              ­ Width: W
              ­ Thickness: 1.5cm for KidSize, 3cm for AdultSize

2610 · Two acrylic plates with: the same length as the wooden board, 3cm width and 2-3mm thickness.
        · 4 Aluminium pipe straps of same size

     Steps for building the measuring device
       1. Glue two acrylic plate on each side of the wooden board as shown in Fig 10a.
       2. Draw a white line on the middle of the board, over the acrylic plates.

2615 3. Screw 4 aluminimum pipe straps at the back-middle of the wooden board, aligning horizontally
           as shown in Fig 10b. This is to determine whether the robot weight is balanced.

       4. Bend 4cm of the aluminimum plate to 90 degrees and tape the Hmax measuring tape as shown
           in Fig 10c.

     Measuring the center of mass

2620

       1. Place the robot flat onto the aluminium plate holding, touching the bottom of the bended
           aluminium plate.

       2. Ensure that the robot is in an upright pose15 as shown in Fig 11a.
2625 3. Align the metal frame holding with the wooden board as shown in Fig 11b.

       4. Slowly, slide the aluminium plate to towards the other end until the wooden board is balanced
           as shown in Fig 11c.

       5. Record the reading shown by the white line in the middle of the wooden board pointing to the
           measuring tape, as shown in Fig 11d.

          15see Fig 3, in Law 4

      97
(a) Gluing two acrylic plates on the wooden board   (b) Aligning pipe straps on the wooden board

                   (c) Bending the aluminimum plate
    Figure 10: Building the measuring device for HCOM

(a) Laying robot upright on measurement device.     (b) Aligning metal frame holding with wooden board.

(c) Balancing the wooden board by sliding the alu-  (d) Reading HCOM on the device
minium plate.

    Figure 11: Procedure for measuring HCOM

98
2630 Manual for building a Parkour Technical Challenge for Kid and Adult size

     The parkour technical challenge is composed of piled platforms.
     The minimum height is 1/5th of the robot's height. The main platform's height is 5 cm, and it has
     an area of 60x60 cm. When the platforms are stacked, they form a stack with resultant height of a
     multiple of 5cm.
2635 This document provides two different options to build the piled platforms and presents technical
     drawings using a 3D grass model. 16

     Materials

2640 · 2 wooden platforms [dimensions 60 x 60 x 5 cm] (see Figure 12)

      · 3 squares of turf17 [dimensions 60 x 60 cm] (2 square as backup)

      · Option 1:

      ­ 28 L-shape wooden supports [dimensions 20x20x7 cm and height 5 cm] (see Figure 13a)
      ­ 48 wooden dowels18 [dimensions 6 mm x 40 mm]

2645  · Option 2:

      ­ 14 straight wooden supports [dimension around 40x7 cm and height 5 cm] (see Figure 13b)
      ­ 12 wooden dowels19 [dimensions 6 mm x 40 mm]

      · 4 hook-and-loop fasteners for one platform and the turf, for a total of 8 hook-and-loop fasteners
        (see Figure 12)

2650  ­ 2 hook-and-loop fasteners [dimension around 30 x 7.5 cm]

      ­ 2 hook-and-loop fasteners [dimension around 40 x 7.5 cm]

                                Figure 12: Top of the Parkour platform with hook-and-loop fasteners.

      Common instructions

        16From: https://www.cgtrader.com/free-3d-models/plant/grass/green-lawn-8d4341d7-6281-40e9-8872-d429512a3b3b.
        17Same turf used for games fields
        18Having extra wooden dowels as spare is recommendable in case they break
        19Having extra wooden dowels as spare is recommendable in case they break

      99
     (a) L-shape wooden support.     (b) Straight wooden support.

     Figure 13: Different support options for the Parkour platform.

2655 The top of the top platform is covered with turf (see Figure 14a) The turf is attachable and
     detachable using hook-and-loop fasteners (double adhesive velcro tape - one side attached to the
     platform, one side attached to the back of the turf piece).
     To increase the height of the platform, add the 4 wooden dowels (see Figure 14b) in the holes on
     the top surface of the platform and add the external supports. Holes in the platform should be 2

2660 cm deep.

     (a) Platform with turf on top.  (b) Wooden dowels.

     Figure 14: Common assembly parts for both options.

100
     Option 1: increase the height of the platform with L-shape wooden supports

     4 L-shape wooden supports are fixed on the 4 corners of the lower platform to increase the height
2665 (see Figure 15a). Each L-shape wooden support needs to fixed on the wooden platforms lower and

     upper with the wooden dowels to be stable (see Figure 15b).

(a) Lower platform with Option 1 L-shape wooden sup-   (b) Lower and upper platform with Option 1 L-shape
ports for increasing height.                           wooden supports for increasing height.

     Figure 15: Option 1: using L-shape wooden supports.

Option 2: increase the height of the platform with straight wooden supports

2670 2 wooden supports are fixed on two sides of the lower platform to increase the height (see Figure 16a).
     Each wooden support needs to fixed on the wooden lower and top platforms with the wooden dowels
     to be stable (see Figure 16b).

(a) Lower platform with Option 2 straight wooden sup-  (b) Lower and upper platform with Option 2 straight
ports for increasing height.                           wooden supports for increasing height.

     Figure 16: Option 2: using straight wooden supports.

101
